Question 1
Interviewer: Can you please describe your role as it's related to the laboratory diagnostic in Rwanda?

Respondent: Thank you, Dr. my role first of all is I am a medical doctor I have a PhD in human genetics I'm the director of allied health services in CHUK, and in addition I work in laboratory, I do laboratory investigation but in addition to my position, and this department is a clinical biology which is involved in the training overlap, especially related courses which will return to the laboratory in the Faculty of Medicine.

Question 3
Interviewer: Thank you very much, from your standpoint, What are the key issues that public private partnership or any contracting modalities aiming to improve the laboratory diagnostic services should focus on or include to be successful?

Respondent: To be successful, first of all, we have to see clearly, which type of the clause of the contract. For instance, the content of the contract, the type of investigations that will be realized, the type of equipment that will be provided. In addition, in case of the maintenance, the backup equipment; all those are processes of procurements, and even the process of payments, even the reagents delivery details. So, I think that all these need to go in details into the contracts. Again the finance also needs to see the aspects of the payments sometimes the cost of the reagents, the equipment, analysis and maintenance are higher than the price that are reimbursed by the community-based insurance and refund, thus the hospital will lose. So, we need to assess these before signing a contract to analyze, will the hospital get any profits? Will the hospital lose? These financial aspects should be also considered in details.

Interviewer: Can you elaborate more a little bit on what you emphasized more to analyze if the hospitals will lose or benefit? Do you have any example that you can now share?

Respondent: We have for example a test of biochemistry. If we have urea, and if you look for the cost of the kits from the supplier, and you look at the time the laboratory will spend on doing those investigations, the cost of electricity, the cost of water, the cost of maintenance, and then you realize that the hospital will be losing because the community-based insurance reimbursement will be low compared to the cost of reagents in addition to the expenses of the hospitals 
For the PPP we have for example, we bought reagents, but for some investigations, the cost of reagents is higher than the cost reimbursed by the community-based insurance.  Does PPP mean that this private company will come and take the laboratory services?

Interviewer: That's very interesting how do you think the need of priority population, such as the poorest household, or these complicated patient cases, cancers or chronic co-morbidities can be accommodated with this kind of PPP?                                                                                                             
So, how does this kind of PPP address the problem of health care in this group category?

Respondent: For example, on our side the public facility, may be more than 95%, are people with community-based insurance,  the poorest people, it means before negotiating the prices, we can consider that price we have with community-based insurance to make sure that we will be able to provide the services, but also remember we are public institutions, we have some funds that we get from the government, which may cover those hospital losses, and then the hospital can be able to pay the lab technicians and Doctors. So, because we have a contribution of the government, we try to adjust the price and then we offer services that can cover those large populations with limited means either through PPP or not

Interviewer: If you compare before the PPP comes in, with the current situation, do you think that the cost has increased?

Respondent: I don't think really. Because we did the analysis when we had another supplier and we found that it depends on the type of reagents, for example you'll find that one of these reagents is cheaper, the other reagents are quite expensive. Nowadays, with the current PPP we have with ABBOTT we have gained because ABBOTT has brought to us the technology, they provided free software, they brought a lot and range of investigations which helped us in analyzing a lot of samples at the same time, we increased the capacity of tesying, but before it was really challenging. Let me give you an example of a patient, the doctor has prescribed full blood count, thyroid hormone, full range of chemistry analysis. But when the patient comes to the lab he would find, that we are only able to perform the full blood counts and because the patient doesn’t want to be picked two times, and then decide to go to another hospital where they can be able to perform all those investigations. However, they could be performed in our lab but because of some stock outs of the reagents,  then some analysis were stopped and we should spend two months without doing some investigations like creatinine and urea .You can imagine that some operations in the theater were stopped too.
But now, we are able to do many investigations at the same time, we no longer have a stock out. We really appreciate the supply chains. So now, even patients come can find that all investigations are available, the lab is fully functioning, we are able to gain other services.

Interviewer: So, in other words, the effective quality of health services and affordability is more covered with the PPP than before.

Respondent: I think yes, because the quality, the affordability and the availability of the services are covered. In case we have the problem of the machine, it's maintained regularly. So we are happy with this partnership.

Interviewer: What do you do with this management and the financing, so the capacity of the different partners to manage, or to deliver the contract, the payment for services, supply chain?

Respondent: It was with ABBOTT, with their instructions. And we had the ministerial instructions that allow us to work with the ABBOTT. But when it is time for the payments it follows the usual payments, done by the hospital so it means we have, the finance department which is preparing the purchasing order with the proformat invoice.

Question 4
Interviewer: That’s very good. So, what are the cost and the benefit of pursuing a PPP or any contracting modalities in the lab diagnostic?

Respondent: Based on the PPP that we have with ABBOTT as it is a company which has experience in the laboratory services, until now we are happy with their services, their supply chains, we no longer face the stock outs of reagents. We have new modern equipment, technology and most of them are semi-automated it doesn’t require a lot of efforts to the person using it and the software they brought are interfaced with our management system, open clinics. It facilitates us in laboratory diagnostics regularly.

Interviewer: So, what do you recommend? As we are having PPP with ABBOTT at CHUK, do you think there can be the scale up of the PPP in the country down there to the health centers? 

Respondent: It will depend because, I cannot reply saying that what is applicable at CHUK can be applicable in health center because we don't have the same volume of patients, we don't have the same packages, because there are some analyses which are allowed to be performed at the referral level, which cannot be performed in the district hospital. For me, In the case of CHUK., even though I said that we are happy, but we still have some challenges that we need to improve. But I don’t have experience to other health facilities to say that it can be applied to lower facilities too.


Question 5
Interviewer: So, how supportive is existing the policy and legal and regulatory framework for PPP in Rwanda.

Respondent: What I can say do we have a policy for PPP. I’m not aware of that. But maybe because we are doing PPP, we have a policy of legal framework. But one of the challenges we have noticed when this PPP with ABBOTT initiated, during negotiations they did not consider the technical aspect of the laboratory to discuss about what will be done, for our experience with this ABBOTT even we look on the price they were proposing, which were already approved at that time we realized that the hospital will lose, they should have focused in all aspects, technical and clinical aspects, that is how it should normally be when conducting the PPP.

Interviewer: Are you sure that the Abbott came with that already signed a contract, without discussion with the hospital?

Interviewer: So, what would you recommend on this aspect about policy, and the legal and regulatory framework?

Respondent: So maybe my recommendation is to involve all stakeholders, because the PPP we have in the laboratory today, tomorrow can be in other disciplines. Clinical discipline or in radiology. We recommend to involve the stakeholders but also to allow some windows of amendment of the contract. I think that there should be a close in case they are not satisfied with the quality of the services to end the contract, without having other legal issues. You know in the health sector this is different from other sectors. All things we do have an impact to the lives of patients so if there is a problem of people who are not satisfied with the service so we need to have a way to cut off or to end the contract.

Interviewer: Do you have this capacity to end this contract with ABBOTT?

Respondent: No, at our level I don't think so.

Interviewer: Who signed the contract?

Respondent: I think that it has been signed by the Ministry of Health.

Interviewer: Do you know any kind of resistance for PPP at the level of policy makers?

Respondent: I don't know.

Interviewer And when you saw the Abbott coming was well received and now you are satisfied. But, at the introduction of the PPP were you receptive, unhappy, or any kind of resistance?

Respondent: So, you know, everywhere we have the resistance to change. Yeah, there was a lot of resistance.

Interviewer: But now you are satisfied?

Respondent: We are quite satisfied with the services.

Question 6
Interviewer: So, if you have some information historically, how have the public and the private sector focusing on health interacted in Rwanda? 
In terms of trusting, collaborative relationship between public sector and the private.

Respondent: I think that we have a formal relationship. For example, when the analysis is not available at our hospital, we can tell, informally to the patient, go to BMC, go to lancet go to this one but we don't have any contract with any private laboratory. As you know, an institution does not provide all the laboratory tests. So maybe if we have accredited laboratories, we should have some agreement with them to be able to perform some investigations. And you know that usually private sector has the capacity to introduce new lab investigations, new technology. So maybe we can have partnership with accredited laboratory to help us to perform some investigations because private sector. Even we can have some collaboration in quality management, to exchange samples for example for quality control etc.

Interviewer: So, do you have such framework. 

Respondent: We don't have such framework. It's informal


Question 7
Interviewer: So, how will health system governance arrangements for example decentralization affect the PPP design?

Respondent: With this experience with ABBOTT, for example the people who signed PPP they didn't take into account that the referral hospital is different from district’s hospital and Health Center, and you will find that ABBOTT the machine they brought to CHUK is similar to the machine they brought to Kibuye hospital and its same machine and yet we don't have the same volumes, the reason why they should have involved all stakeholders on table of discussion. So, when you are signing a PPP you don't have to consider what is applicable only for you and think it can be applicable on other level. For instance, us, we manage because we have a big volume but some district hospital, they don't manage to work with ABBOTT some even have preferred to use the local supplier contract they have, because maybe it’s not even possible with their funds, they don't have even the infrastructure, a large place to install those instruments, they don't have a good internet. So, when signing a PPP, we need to consider all level of the health sectors not to take them as whole package.
In addition, the positive impact of it for example is that when we a problem with our machine, we can send our sample to the nearest district hospital for them to run the tests. 

Interviewer: So who should be held accountable for the success of PPP or deliverables, under the selected contract modalities?

Respondent: So first of all, I think all the people who signed the contract, implementers, the stakeholders, because they attended the meeting and agreed all to make sure the client will be satisfied, I think they will all be able to handle the users’ complaints. So, I think all people should be held accountable for the success of PPP.

Interviewer: You told me that the ministry of health is one who signed the contract with ABBOTT. Is there any monitoring and evaluation mechanism for follow up?

Respondent: I don't know if it is done by MOH. But sometimes there are some people who come to collect the data I’m not sure if they are from RBC or from MOH. But for us, we are just implementing the contract. I think there is no regular monitoring.

Interviewer: What do you propose for the efficiency and sustainability of the services?

Respondent: Maybe as you said to have a monitoring system here, for example, in annual meetings, to see how far the PPP is going on, to have some surveys from the stakeholder, if they are satisfied, but again to the supplier too we should have a meeting with them to see if they are happy to work with us, even to assess the process of payment. So then we may be able to evaluate if we are losing money or if we are gaining money.

Question 8
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, what has been the historic investment, and interest from government in the laboratory diagnostics?


Respondent: There is a huge investment in laboratory, because we have the laboratory services in the hospitals all over the country but still, we need the improvement because laboratory is considered as support services of the hospital and yet it is obvious that the laboratory has not the proper considerations. Because it's where we have a few staff and few budgets, it’s a challenge to buy equipment, and there is no adequate training of the staff and even the medical doctor.

Interviewer: How does improvement in the laboratory diagnostic align with the government priority for the health sector?

Respondent: With Covid19 we have seen that laboratories are key. But for me I think that laboratory services are not prioritized.  

Interviewer: What is the profile of health workers involved in diagnostic system, including training, cadres? 

Respondent: The challenge we have in our system is that we don’t have medical specialists with laboratory specialties, people always think that laboratory stuff would only be lab technicians, we don't have enough scientists and they are not even on the structure of the hospital so that they can be able to check for the quality and the validity of the test, the reason why we need to invest in the training of health care professionals. , The challenge we had is that we do the laboratory services but we have no one to check for the quality, the validity of the test. So, we need to invest in the training of health care professionals.

Question 9
Interviewer: So, who are the key stakeholders that should be involved in developing the PPP?

Respondent: We need to have the Ministry of Health, the government policy actors, the stakeholders, the users the hospitals, and maybe even the private sector. And at central, level the governmental officials. 

Question 10
Interviewer: So, what is that relative influence over these actors on negotiation of the PPP? 

Respondent: So, first of all we have the government, which has the high influence, but also, we need to take into consideration other stakeholders, hospitals on the table of discussion, so that they wouldn’t only get the instruction to implement the PPP without knowing how it comes. Actually, the users don’t have a lot of influence and yet they should be the ones to decide as they are the ones to implement the PPP.

Question 11
Interviewer: Whose interests are helped or hurt by laboratory diagnostic happening in the public versus private sector?

Respondent: I think it's the patients who would encounter all the consequences as they are the ones to get the lab investigations done. It will be the patient who will benefit, or will be harmed from a good or a bad contract. Even the hospital because even the hospital will lose money and will not be able to pay their stuff because they have lost money, but the first person to be impacted by those contracts is the patient.

Interviewer: What is the biggest incentive for private partners to participate in the PPP?

Respondent: So, I think that first of all is a financial benefit but also to see how the contract are managed, because sometimes terms of contract can attract to come in to improve the life.  So I think from my view, having a good collaboration with the private sector can attract them to expand their services in our country. We are eager to work with investors.

Interviewer: Do you think that private partners working in the laboratory diagnostic in Rwanda, have the capacity to participate and deliver on the PPP.

Respondent: I don't have any information but I think they are able.

Question 13
Interviewer: So, how could PPP be designed to achieve scale-up and sustainability?

Respondent: I think it should be well structured in a way that before even signing the contract there should situation analysis on the field, the different levels of the health sectors, and even including the community-based insurance in discussion to discuss about the modality of the payment and reinvestment for a PPP to be sustainable. All the items should be taken into consideration at the introduction of the PPP.

Question 14
Interviewer: What are the plans in place to support public sector financing of the diagnostic in the future?

Respondent: I think the plan that I’m aware of for example is University of Rwanda have to develop new curriculum where we will have specialists in the laboratory services and I know the HRH also is planning with the university, to see how the universities can produce those specialists and people with those masters in laboratory sciences.
In short the government is improving the profile of health care professionals involved in the laboratory services but also, I think that there is a willingness of the government to support the hospital to get new laboratory equipment and even increasing the number of the staff. 


Interviewer: Which different sources funding are expected to be used for financing diagnostic?

Respondent: So, the financing can be provided by the government, the funders, maybe even some research grants, or even the hospital generated funds.

Interviewer: How has the government increased financing support to the diagnostic during the PPP?

Respondent: So, because we have our own budget, we have allocated the budgets to buy the reagents to Abbott.

Interviewer: Are these financing plans sustainable?  Why, and why not.

Respondent: I think they are.

Interviewer: How viable are the different sources of funding being considered?

Respondent: For us, it is income generated funds and government funds.

Question 15
Interviewer: So, is there anything else you would like to discuss about the PPP that we have not talked about?

Respondent: I think that I have said all the challenge faced during the implementation of the PPP when the end users were not part of the discussion at the beginning, basically when the design of the PPP does not focus and plan well considering all the places.


Question 1
Interviewer:  So the first question that we have for you is that we want to understand your involvement in the PPP process under the AHDP, the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda. So, and my question will be first to try to understand if you're familiar with the African health diagnostic platform.

Respondent: Thank you. I'm not familiar with African health diagnostics platform. 

Interviewer: So you have never attended any meeting where this was discussed?

Respondent:  No, what I attended back in 2020, it was a workshop, organized by CHAI and the Ministry of Health. They were exploring the possibilities of using PPP frameworks for laboratory services in Rwanda, and they were discussing the pros and cons, looking at the different services and looking at that chain and also service delivery and which part of that chain would be most suitable to fall under PPP and which one wouldn’t.  And I remember we requested for the report out of that workshop I think CHAI was the one handling it, and we never received it. But my particular submission was mostly on the PPP processes that are provided under the regulations that we have and we were very clear that if you decide to take that PPP route, definitely, you must go through the processes that are provided for. And of course, as RDB we usually come in at the point of negotiation.
So, a contracting authority would have cited a bid and you go into the procurement process selected. And then you also have that part of the law that requires you to present a feasibility study to the steering committee. Once the steering committee agrees to it, then you move on to project contract negotiations. That's where we come in and support and lead. We help with drafting the negotiation, put it into a document, and then take it to the internal government processes for it to be approved. And then that is when at the end of it we handle it over back to the contracting authority which I think in this case would be MOH if we are dealing with a lab related PPP.


Interviewer: I have understood well so you come out quite late in the process, during the negotiations.

Respondent:  During negotiations, though we have had instances in the past on different projects where you know the investor comes in, maybe either to us, or to MOH, RBC, and has expressed interest in developing a project but we usually work with them through the process.  So, in the feasibility study sometimes we might be sitting as part of the technical team, but by heavily led and supported by the line ministry.  And then we gather input between financials, especially because we have some people who work on financials here. They will advise to see the viability of the proposed project, before we move on to approving it by the steering committee and then the contract negotiation.

Interviewer: But then as you were not actually involved in all the design, especially the design discussions because we were looking at how coming up with a final design, and all the discussions that happened before we come up with a final design and we're interested to get more insight into those discussions.                                                                                                                            But nevertheless, we still have some few questions for you. The most focused on PPP in Rwanda. 

Question 3
Interviewer: So, from your standpoint, what are the key issues that the PPP that aims to improve lab diagnostic services should focus on or include to be successful?

Respondent:  I think, in order for PPP to be successful. I think the prior initial steps are very important actually areas of the feasibility study. I will think it's important that whoever is leading either the line ministry or the proposed investor has adequate data to develop a good feasibility study. And that's going to look mostly on the technical and financial viability of the project or a percept of that PPP. So that, I have found it very important during the PPP process and it really feeds and determines how successful or unsuccessful a PPP will be at the end of the day. The results of the feasibility study definitely also inform what would be put into the contract between the parties. It would really also give you a good understanding of what the project implementation will look like. Because parties will have enough data and understanding what the findings are. You know what the loopholes are and what they're trying to achieve and fix in the system. So they'll be able to pretty much implement with some sense of direction and information. That's what I would propose.

Interviewer:  And what about the management and finance and aslo the capacity, because when you started PPP you had also to ensure that you have the capacity in your institution. What do you think about that?

Respondent:  I think that's a very pertinent point, definitely good management or, bad management can break the whole process or break that whole project. So it's very vital, those are things that come up during the contract negotiation that you're putting in, and adequate team, a team that is skilled and knowledgeable in this part.  And this is where PPP really comes to help because one of the objectives of a PPP is, public bodies are relying on private sector capacity and expertise, as well as even financing. So, really, you know as a government institution, as a public entity, you are looking to the private sector and you partner with them to bring in that extra level of skill set that you might not have in house, or even if you do, private sector could compliment it. So, during the negotiation, it's important that parties align on what the management will look like. What decision making processes will be in place to govern the project.
What happens when you know their disagreements you know how those are dealt with management, and that sort of thing? So it's really important that those are elements that parties discussed during the contract negotiation, and also try and leverage each other's skill set. So if you have a stronger skill set in public sector well and  good that could really be useful in management, but if you also have it in the private sector, you know, use it to your advantage for the purposes of the project.


Question 4
Interviewer:  What are the costs and benefits of pursuing PPP, especially for lab diagnostic at this stand? 

Respondent:  Well, I don't know if I can specifically answer for lab diagnostic. I would probably give advantages and disadvantages I guess of pursuing a PPP. Really most of the advantages:  you have an ability to share risk between partners.  So that's between public and private. Usually the risk will be allocated to the party that is more equipped, or best equipped to handle it and to deal with it. So it could be financial risk, technical risk whichever it is, but there is that advantage that you can share risk for purposes of the project. You also then have the ability to rely on private sector financing. It also relieves the public sector off you know spending so much to certain key areas such as health, educational, housing whichever it could be this allows the public sector to free up a bit of its budget, depending on its contribution towards the PPP, then you also have, as I said, the ability with a PPP in long term. So you're able to even plan futuristically for your community, for your society. It truly provide some comfort of knowing you taking the necessary steps at the beginning, you've procured the best person, and negotiated with them a solid contract. And this is going to govern an asset or a resource for quite a long period of the time you know you need that project will benefit the community for years to come.
Another advantage maybe about PPP as I said you rely on the private sector expertise. You know, partnering with a private sector, given the diversity of resources and talent, you really are able to tap into that sort of thing and gives a good flavor to that PPP arrangement.
Some of the disadvantages were that the timeline of the PPP will be long. As much as that could be a good thing, it can also be a bad thing. Some of these contracts extremely long they might be cost associated with terminating them earlier than anticipated. The private sector players may be claiming f you terminate early, you might have to reimburse them for the investment costs they have made, and that's quite a financial risk on the part of the public partner. There is disadvantage that they are long in terms of how they are structured.  Another disadvantage is that you might have cases of bad management. You might have cases where people get comfortable during the course of the project and they will be changed. For instance, there may be changes in the public sector, you might have new leaders coming in not following on understanding the objective of the previous leader. And that inconsistency may result in risk of t actually just terminating the contract, the need to throw the contract or project.
So those are some of the disadvantages but at least what we've seen in practice is that there are certainly more advantages than disadvantages. PPP really gives both parties, some level of comfort with executing very crucial but strategic projects with a society. 

Question 5
Interviewer: And the next question something that have a legal background so how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for PPPs.

Respondent:  I think it's very supportive. Initiatives have been made to ensure that first of all the legal framework is up to date. Actually, with the business needs of the society, and also as provided for such different categories of where PPPs can be used to, it's been more structured. And that really provides more clarity, between partners. So I would say the legal framework is very supportive. It's very relevant, it looks at the different scenarios and has highlighted key sectors of the economy that are very instrumental in helping people in facilitating even better service delivery in the country.

Interviewer:  So based on your experience how much resistance do you see among policymakers to PPP?

Respondent:  I think there was a lot of resistance at the very beginning when, especially the new law and policy were being introduced. There was definitely a reservation on choosing to use a more structured, I mean going through all the current steps that are provided under the law. Most people thought it is too lengthy. They thought it would really take up a lot of time. It might even maybe push away the private sector, they thought people will lose interest when they see how extensive the process is.
But what we really try to do at the beginning and even continue doing, because we still get these comments, is to really show that for good PPP to work, it's important that you set up the right way, from the very beginning from day one. So, if you take it through the proper steps and the proper channel as much as you think, that's actually saving you time and money in the future because you would have given it such a good foundation that it will be able to stand and actually take off as a PPP project. So, most of the people prefer the procurement route where they can single source, they can really do things very quickly. But we have also seen you know there's a disadvantage with that because sometimes partnerships don’t work out and then you get into disputes,  you get into arguments, and that sort of thing.
So, definitely there's some resistance, based on the fact that of course this is new, we've introduced, a more detailed structure and how you take on how PPP project is exempted. I mean how it is from reception to closure. And what was the reason for this was we're trying to standardize our processes. You know we benchmark from different countries not only within Sub Saharan but really also on the rest of the continent. Because at the end of the day, you know, these are things that are making other countries progress and there's no reason why we should be left behind. So fine tuning this processes even attract better investors, the legal framework has created more transparency, you have more accountability, see things like the PPP steering committee coming in, you know you have contracting authority taking more responsibility, and that provides investors and private sector confidence in how we are doing things with PPP.

Interviewer:  And how flexible is the PPP to changes for example in government priorities.

Respondent: I'm sorry I maybe don't understand that question by flexible you mean, can you change to another model?

Interviewer:  Yes, yes

Respondent:  That may be a bit tricky. Especially as I have said if you have taken it to the right processes, according to the law. That may be a bit difficult. You might have to then terminate it, and then start afresh and choose another option if that is what parties have decided.

Interviewer:  Okay, so if we want to change something in the PPP, because we came up with a model and then we realized that maybe we should refine it and changes to a certain different type of model. So that means that will need to terminate it first? 

Respondent:  And when you say a different model what do you mean a financial model? Or for instance when you have decided to build on transfer PPP and then for instance you want to change it maybe to a joint venture is that kind of change you're talking about?

Interviewer:  All changes especially here for the lab diagnostics so they have different models so some models where they were proposing For example, co-management between the government and the private partner, and the model all where we will just decide  to go for privatization.

Respondent:  Okay. The important thing here is you have to be clear on what you're calling a PPP what you're calling privatization. What you're calling a sale, because you have to be careful not to mix up these terms. The law clearly provides what categories of contracts or niche agreements would fall under a PPP. So I think we have about four or five just double check. There's a build on and operate. That’s where may be government allows you to build on that asset and allows you to operate it. And then there is a build on and transfer where at the end of a specific term that asset it will be sent, transferred back to government.                                                We have management agreements as well. And then we have lease operate and develop. So where the government will lease an asset, operate it and then develop it at some point. Yeah. Now when you bring in something like privatization in its strict sense means that you're relinquishing all ownership rights over an asset. So you're giving it away completely to the private sector, forever. You're not going to then come back and say, you know, give me back my asset, because they've paid for it. The private sector is now the owner, that is privatization and that's completely different from what PPP is.

Interviewer:  I read the document and looking at the description and characteristics, it looked like the new that one the lease operate and develop. Give the lab sector, the lab network to a private partner that has expertise in how to manage these labs. The different labs that we have in the country. And that question that company that private partner will operate these labs but also develop for a certain period of time.  Was co-management so that the government will have some responsibilities with, and the private partner also will have some responsibilities.


Respondent:  So in that case, if it's a co management. You know that wouldn’t go through the PPP process as provided by the law. I think that's something, then either the hospital or through MOH or RBC, can then maybe put out a tender, looking for co-managers, you get a pool of interested people you select, and then you get into those separate co management agreements with them. So that would be, pretty much just take on an ordinary contract arrangement, as opposed to a PPP that's more detailed and has to go through a feasibility study process, clearance and that sort of thing. So, coming back to your question of can it change? It would make more sense if it's a lease operate and develop for example, at the beginning, that's what parties have agreed to have negotiated.
I just want to maybe try and see if I got your question right when you asking, can it change for instance from lease operate and develop to a management contract. Well, that is something you will have to discuss as parties, we have not seen it in practice. I have not seen anyone change their structure midway project; I have not really seen that before. So, I'm not very sure if that's possibl


Interviewer: All the other way around coming from the management, this lease, operate and develop, so you have never seen that.

Respondent: I haven't seen parties switch the nature of the contracts especially with the PPPs because they've really taken a lot of time to negotiate at the beginning. And really tried to factor in all risks you know all possible mishaps. You know there are so many things that have gone into that process. So it's a bit hard to tell if someone can just change I haven't seen that in practice in my time here.

Question 6
Interviewer: Historically, how the public and the private sectors are focusing on health, how have they interacted in the past years?

Respondent:  I haven't seen that many PPPs in health, there's one that we're hoping will take effect they are still at the feasibility study stage. It looks promising. They have taken quite a long time developing the feasibility study, but that is because it went to the process provided for under the law, so they are expected to have that feasibility study done approved by the contracting authority submitted to the steering committee, before it progresses to contract negotiation.  But the rest of the contracts we have seen in health you know they're outside the PPP format. So you'll have management or service contracts you know between the public sector and the private partner.

Interviewer: And the collaboration between two partners how do you find it? Is this like they trust really each other, does the relationship really smooth between the two partners.

Respondent: You mean between the private and public?

Interviewer:  Yes, the private and the public sector, especially in health.

Respondent: I think there's a lot of good faith, between the parties, there's a lot of collaboration. I think it's an area that both partners are willing to explore willing to get into business on with. So, I think it's very good I think it's very positive.

Interviewer:  So, you said something that I want us to better understand you said that the most of the contracts for the health sector are out of the PPP.

Respondent:  If either one I've seen and if you're talking about PPP according to the law. Just for clarity.

Interviewer: Okay. So, can you tell me according to the law, what is a PPP, just for me to better understand?

Respondent: Well, maybe just also for your own reading the current law is called its implementation of the law number 14/2016. In second may 2016 governing public private partnerships. So, that was passed about 2016, 2017 I believe. Let me just pull up the exact definition so that we may be clear for the get go.

When you talk about PPPs and that's the struggle we're having and I think it was one of the things we kept debating on at that workshop in 2020.We keep mixing up what a PPP is, I think we're just have this understanding of if you have a government or public office and private partner done that's a PPP. But no that's not a PPP.
You need to fall within the categories that the law has provided for. And when you go through the law you actually see it provides for a clarity on what these structures look like. So, it's very important, PPP’s main characteristic is that they are long term agreements. They are between definitely public partner and private partner and is definitely an aspect of, even the whole element of how they come into play, how they come into existence. That's also something that is taken into consideration, but the Law does provide quite a detailed understanding of what the PPPs are.

Interviewer: Thank you, this makes things more clearly.

Question 7
Interviewer: Yeah. The next question is, how health system governance arrangements affect the design of the PPP, you know, I think it's also applicable to the administrative governance that then the governance in general that we have in Rwanda,

Respondent: I have not seen it yet, I have no idea.

Interviewer:  Especially if you are implementing the PPP and you have this different level of decisions. Who is going to be held accountable if it's a PPP that is going to be implemented at the lower level, and you have these two layers of decisions?
If something happens, who is going to be held accountable, easy cutter for during the design or, I don't know.

Respondent:  I haven't dealt with that particularly but if I was to speculate I would assume that's something that you negotiate and agree on how management will work.  That's all I can think of.

Interviewer:  Yeah. So, meaning that one when you are working on the PPP this is something that you should plan ahead and negotiate and set it clear.

Respondent:  Yes, I would advise that too.

Question 8
Interviewer: Next question is asking. Maybe you may not have much information about that. But we are looking at investments and interest from the government in lab diagnostic.

Respondent: I don't know if I can answer that.

Interviewer:  So you've been working in different sector except from the PPP that you were just mentioning that is currently ongoing, have you worked on any other PPP in the health sector before?

Respondent: No, I have not. 

Interviewer:  So you've been working mainly in which sector.

Respondent:  It really varies from forestry to agriculture to tourism to ICT to energy, mining to mention few.

Interviewer:  Is this because there are few people in health sector or, because maybe by chance you just don't work in health.

Respondent:  I haven't seen that many people up in the health sector, genuinely, this is the  one that we are hoping will be materialized  but as I said it's at the  feasibility study stage.

Interviewer:  Okay, interesting. But then, all the service contracting,  So that means that this doesn't go through RDB, no.

Respondent:  They will not. Sometimes they will still negotiate them but they won't go through for instance the PPP steering committee, they most likely will not have feasibility studies done, which is very pertinent for PPP project you must have a feasibility study.

Question 9
Interviewer: So, okay then for a PPP who are the stakeholders that should be involved, when you're developing a PPP. Let's say we have this PPP in health, what are the key stakeholders that should be involved.

Respondent:  Align ministry so Ministry of Health. You might want to have Ministry of Finance in case any budgetary financial contribution. And I guess I don't know who else was under the Ministry of health with any technical parties would be good as well. Maybe RBC as well, depending on what objective is.

Interviewer:  No any other like government institution?

Respondent:  You would have to depend on what the project is about and what the objective is.

Interviewer: So yeah, and do you have for example this one was around laboratory diagnostics. So what about the health facilities should they be also involved in developing the PPP

Respondent:  I'm not sure I think that would be a decision for a centralized level to decide who they would need for the purposes of developing the PPP and the discussion.

Interviewer: But then, when we look at these key stakeholders. What is their influence in driving the PPP?

Respondent: What do you mean in driving the PPP mean the process or actual implementation of the project? 

Interviewer: The process, because we are still at this phase of the process. So especially when they are designing the PPP and when it comes to negotiations.


Respondent:  I think that would really depend on what the ministry would lead on the technical part, it would come in with some district I don't know whoever feel is necessary for the purposes of the project. They might be instrumental in reviewing the feasibility study findings, develop with a private partner and give feedback. I think that is maybe a crucial role that they can play, and definitely provide any technical input during contract negotiation.

Interviewer:  And what about RDB you didn't list, actually it's now, RDB before the key stakeholders, when you're developing the PPP shouldn't RDB be there?

Respondent: We come in at the point of contract negotiation. Again, that's also provided for another look on what our role is.

Interviewer:  And doing now, contract negotiation. What is your role?

Respondent:  We lead the negotiations we help draft conduct the meetings; we review, we take the project documents through the internal approval processes, we ensure that all the parties concerns are catered for we try and get the best positions for each party, and then ensure that’s reflected in the document. 


Question 12
Interviewer: And then, so how based on your experience with other PPP how interested are private partners to participate in the PPP. For instance what are their incentives to participate, what are their drawbacks?

Respondent:  I think I would defer to the Investment court; I am sure there are some benefits that are provided for generally incentive that would be enticing to investors in any sector, there are some that are very general: you have the corporate income tax holidays, you have immigration incentives, you might also input duty incentives where you permitted a certain incentive the importing equipment what a certain amount. I think those are the things that would drive private sector interest. And that's what government has done to create a favorable investment climate. For those particular reasons. So I would defer to the investment court. Definitely I think during your research you can definitely look at the incentives dedicated to the health sector and get an idea of what would drive private sector involvement in that.

Interviewer: And then what are the drawbacks?

Respondent:  I think that the drawbacks are, I’m just speculating I'm not sure.

Interviewer: There is no problem it's based on what you learned.

Respondent:  I think health is a very sensitive sector. I think it's one that has been predominantly and historically led by governments. Very people centric so you have to be careful with how you manage such service, you know, things like education and health almost put them in the same category, they're very particular with how they should be handled so I think you know you have a bit of that may be reservation but the bit of it is that you know these are sectors that have also been evolving over time you have telemedicine coming up. You have so many innovations in the health sector coming up as well. And another thing government has done is to also move with the times and ensure that it's facilitating all these innovations. So that's why I'm saying when you look at the incentives. You know they’re really encouraging to innovators and investors not only in health sector but in various sectors, so the drawbacks would only pick up the sensitivity of the sector, that may create some level of a drawbacks, but you know people are getting more creative every other day.

Question 12
Interviewer:  This is the last question for you. How the PPP could be designed to achieve scale up and sustainability.

Respondent:  It would be based on the findings of the feasibility study that will inform how you should design it.  That's why I would say it depends on what the findings are, what the financial and technical viability looks like. You look at the parties’ strength and then you decide which format under the law would make more sense to both of you.

Interviewer:  And then for sustainability when we go for PPP we want something that will actually address the challenges the issues that we have in whatever systems we're working with, If someone wanted to get working on a PPP in whatever sector. So what would you advise especially for the sustainability component? What should we look at? 

Respondent: I think that would be informed still by a feasibility study it should show you how viable the project is, so you'll be able to determine how you can sustain it.  Do you need to take out a loan? How are you going to finance it? Do you have enough equity, you know all those things if you're going to look at the kind of equipment you're using, what are the management costs related to it, is it something that you can sustain? I think your feasibility study if you take good time to develop it, that informs you because you might bring information to then implement the project correctly and in a sustainable manner.

Interviewer: So, this is the last one, but this is for you actually so if there is anything that you would like to add on what we have discussed.

Respondent:  No, Thank you.

Interviewer: Thank you for your time. And we're very glad that you've been able to find some time to discuss with us. And this will help this evaluation, and it will be really helpful for us to understand better the PPP process and PPP implementation at the country level, that will help also this evaluation that we are doing for the AHDP project.
 So, thank you. Take care.





































