Question 1
Interviewer: So the first question that we have for you is to ask you to describe your involvement in this PPP process for the AHDP. At what point where you involved?  And what were you doing? What was your role?

Respondent: If we can go back a little bit, actually I was going to ask you. Have you spoken with DM of NRL?

Interviewer: Division manager?

Respondent: Yeah. Because actually, this is my first time to participate in anything on AHDP of course, other PPP projects, such as ABBOTT and others I have participated but this is the first time for me with AHDP, I think I'm not the right person, I don’t know it.

Interviewer: So, we talked with the Division Manager, we had also plan to talk with the Former Head of Department of Biomedical services.

Respondent: Okay.

Interviewer: So, the AHDP, maybe I can give you more details in 2019 I think CHAI was the technical assistance for that particular PPP. So this was a PPP that was supposed to be financed through the European Investment Bank, they had some funds for that and then, CHAI was providing technical support, they worked with the NRL team, and as well as the ministry of health team.  First of all, they did some assessment of the situation at that time, to see what the challenges that we have are in the lab diagnostic system.


Respondent: I think I know about those assessment that was done.

Interviewer:  From there they did, I think a feasibility study where they came up with the different options for the PPP that went from, I think sample transportation, then they started with something like co-management, privatization,  they had a lot of discussions around that. So, the questions that we have here ask your involvement. This will depend on your involvement actually in the process. 
So we have some questions about how did it go and if you do remember attending some of the meetings maybe you'll be able to provide also some information.


Respondent: Then I understand.

Interviewer:  So then to clarify that it would be interesting for you to explain to us what your real role at what were you involved? What did you do exactly?  Did you have like a specific role at the forefront, or were you more like at the back, something like that. Yeah.

Respondent: Okay, Then I understand. All right, so we may go ahead.

Interviewer: Okay, so can you describe your involvement in this PPP process.

Respondent:  So, just like you said few years back, 2018-2019, there was a gap seen in the lab networks, we had to assess the available resources how we can distribute equally how we can optimize to improve the services in laboratories across the hospitals.  So, I remember that the first time I was involved was in the preparation of technical documents during the need assessment. I was invited to the meeting to provide biomedical engineers to support the program, we had someone assigned and then this person participated whether for the site visits in the hospitals, and then collection of data, development of reports, as it moved forward. I also participated in a workshop to approve or to validate the final proposals, the outcome of the surveys I think that was my involvement in the process.

Interviewer: And can you remember when this workshop happened?

Respondent:  I know it was in Rubavu. But I would have to check

Interviewer: Was it last year, or 2020? And you were talking about the workshop where you were invited for the validation of the findings in Rubavu.

Respondent: There is one that happened in Kigali may be in this hotel, I am not remembering the name exactly. It’s also about the validation of these.

Interviewer: Okay, and actually CHAI was the one leading, organizing and presenting the results of what they did.

Respondent: Yes, that's the case. I think the Rubavu one was the NSP It wasn't about this, it was the laboratory national strategic plan.

Interviewer: The Rubavu one?

Respondent:  I think so, we got too many but I think that is the correct answer.

Interviewer:   Okay. So, you told me also that someone from your department was involved in working with the team when they were working on the needs assessment, right? 

Respondent: Yes. We have assigned a biomedical engineer who was in charge of the laboratory equipment, management, and this person participated in the process as well.

Interviewer:   Is he still working with RBC?

Respondent: Yes, it's an engineer.  Yeah, he is currently still in the position.

Interviewer: Okay, maybe we'll reach out to him also.

Respondent: Yeah sure, feel free. 


Question 3
Interviewer: Thank you. So, the next question we want to better understand how the process of negotiation of the PPP. How did it go? If you can describe how the process was undertaken.

Respondent:  I don't think I can provide much more details on that. I was not really involved in the PPP negotiations.  What I know is the process usually goes through RDB and it depends on their terms, it depends on the responsibilities of each party, but I really didn't participate actively in the development of the PPP.

Interviewer:  And then, if we talk about now the different models that came out of, you know they did the feasibility study presented at the end, some models. So were you involved during the discussion around these models which one should we, for example, implement versus another? Did you participate in such meetings?

Respondent: No, not so much.

Interviewer:   So the one you went at that hotel was just validation of the findings.

Respondent: The findings. That's correct. 

Interviewer: Findings of the need assessment? 

Respondent: Assessment. Yeah, that was about the findings of the need assessment and proposal of redistribution to ensure optimized service delivery. After I didn't go into the next steps.


Interviewer:  Okay. And what if you don't know if you still remember these propositions of redistribution. What did they exactly presented ? 

Respondent: It was mostly about identifying where different systems or more than one system are installed and not being used optimally. Whether those services are needed in another hospital health facility that could use the same system and then they identify the placements and proposed redistribution equally.

Interviewer: Yeah, the equipment that were available in the system. You said that you didn't participate in the discussion around the selection of the model to implement especially when they were discussing the PPP design because we wanted to know, how it happened during the discussion and what were the sticking points you know those points where people are discussing a lot, and not agreeing?


Question 3
Interviewer: What were those points and then how were they resolved. If you didn't participate, then it's going to be difficult to answer that. But I think you are aware of what was going on and I would like to know if you knew the institution or individuals involved in the design of the PPP.

Respondent:  No, I don't think so, but that's why I was asking if you spoke to DM because he would be much more informed than me, otherwise I didn't really follow after the validation.

Interviewer:   Oh, okay. Actually, we talked to him but we wanted to talk to as many people as possible to gather more information.  So then, after the meeting that you attended for the needs assessment for the rest of the activity who was involved, or even for him he wasn't involved in the discussions, especially on the design of the PPP.

Respondent:   No, after the technical part, we did not participate further, even the engineer I mentioned did not.

Interviewer: Okay

Respondent: I can share his contacts, maybe he can also tell you

Interviewer: You said that your involvement was at the beginning, when you had to provide technical details and then to help in the needs assessment. So, I was asking when the feasibility study was available with the different PPP designs or models that were proposed, were you not involved or attended in any meeting where they presented these designs?

Respondent:  No, not really.

Interviewer:  We see then you haven't heard about anything about a PPP for the lab network. I was actually looking at the questions that we have based on your feedback.

Respondent:  Not really.

Interviewer: You didn't have any information about this AHDP-PPP. So nothing about, no discussion around the co-management that they proposed at some points or about the privatization.


Respondent: Except for the documents that you shared I hadn't heard about AHDP.


Question 9
Interviewer:  Okay. So let's then keep it in general, based on your knowledge of the lab network that we have and then as a biomedical engineer, you know, so the equipment that we have, would you think  for example how should an ideal PPP accommodate the needs of priority population for example if we have to design  ( a PPP) for public private partnership in lab diagnostic, how should it be designed so that we accommodate the needs of our priority population like the poorest households , and  people with very complicated diseases.

Respondent:  Well, it’s very difficult question very broad, but I think PPP is possible in lab diagnostics especially in providing, specific equipment with the manufacturer, where they provide a machine and then we pay on test or reagents procured. But there's another way of that can be having to outsource some of the tests that were supposed to be done by the lab, outsourcing them to a more mobile, or, let's say quick people who can quickly intervene to serve the population, some can even find those patients at home instead of them moving to the hospital or to the lab. So, I know that it is possible and it's being done in other countries, where they have well established laboratories and the government outsource some of the testing, even high containment requirements, testing. So, it could be interesting to see here in Rwanda, and it will definitely solve few of issues that exist currently.

Interviewer:  So, it's very difficult when I’m looking at keeping it general not going into this AHDP-PPP 

Respondent: I can imagine. 

Interviewer:  Yeah, when you look at the PPP that we have currently let's use the PPP that we have currently in place in Rwanda. Do you think that they address the real needs of the people, and if no, what are the areas that we can improve and how can we improve those areas?


Respondent: Somehow, they address some of the important issues that we had such as availing reagents on time and also having to plan together for payment ahead of time. But it is a bit limiting as well because in case they don't perform well there is delay and you always have to wait for the same person to handle the tests. Also, they can choose to perform well, or limit in their expertise I think we have had some case where all the promised services were not provided as it is written in the contracts. So, there are pros and cons to the PPP that exists already. But I would say that, comparing to the non-PPP the other contracts that we have there for equipment, it is far better. Currently, having a PPP is far better than having to depend for ourselves to buy an equipment one by one.
And make sure that you have reagents for all the equipment, without collaboration with the manufacturer or someone who is in charge of that. I think there is more pros and cons to having a PPP. 

Interviewer: And then, were you involved in other PPP for example the PPP with Abbott

Respondent:  To some extent yes, but not at the beginning but during the management of the contract, and also during the renewal when I was in this.


Question 14
Interviewer: And then, what can we learn from this experience? What are the main lessons that you learned from or still learning even from this PPP?

Respondent:  The first one is, maybe to ensure that the terms are beneficial to both sides equally. Because after signature one must ensure that the services are being offered continuously in quality, quantity and in a safe manner. But also, we saw that there was less capacity building for the PPP system, so I would definitely focus on having some capacity building for the hospitals which can benefit both the supplier and the client, in terms of having someone who can do small repairs who can do preventive maintenance and then who can do troubleshooting so that the services are not delayed or stopped. And the supplier would still keep some of the most important or the difficult services to handle so I would say that I would look at the terms very carefully and have them benefit both parties, especially our people in the field.


Question 16
Interviewer:  When you do a PPP like this, were there key stakeholders and why were they involved?

Respondent: So, I would say the most important is the patient the beneficiary, and why, because they're the ones who receive the services, the services should be the best they can get at time also with providing full information. I would also think hospitals or other clinicians, because having a good network with good machine of full best options that are operational can be an advantage. So, they are very much important in the network.
And of course, the government or the procurement entity, the counterpart, it’s very important that these PPPs conducted, the contracting entity, the procurement entity can ensure that the population they are serving are receiving the services that are intended to them. So it is important that the contracting entity put attention into what they are doing and of course this applies to supplier or the manufacturer too.


Question 17
Interviewer:  So, the next question is about we are looking, we want to know who benefits the most when there is public-private partnership lab diagnostic who do you think benefit the most?

Respondent: Again, I would say we wish who benefit the most is the patient, still they are the ones who benefits most of the time. Because that is what we are doing to satisfy the clients the PPP is solving a problem in terms of quality in terms of time and services.  But if you consider the contractor and the partner, or if you consider the government and the partner. I think they both have the same stake. They both have to ensure that they will provide the services to their satisfaction of the other party.

Interviewer: Yeah, I was asking this question because the next one is really to try to understand is there anyone or any institution that can be threatened by the fact that the government is going into partnership with a private actor in the lab diagnostics? 

Respondent: Any institution?

Interviewer: Yes

Respondent:  Depends on which point of view, where are you coming from. If I'm to speak as a government employee I would say it will depend on the benefits that the government will be getting.  And in this case, I think, no one is being threatened because it's an added value for the people for the government, there is some improvements because this is reducing the investments that are being done irregularly or the problem of not giving the full services that we want, this can solve the problems of delay.
But as if I’m to speak as a private supplier of equipment of lab equipment In that case, I would be threatened.  So it depends on which side you're on but I would say that only the competitors, the people who had been supplying the equipment, the reagents as we engage into a PPP there is a way some are not considered, in order to utilize the same equipment.

Interviewer:  Okay. Do we have many suppliers of lab equipment? Apart from ABBOTT, and ROCHE, do we have others?

Respondent:  Yeah, in Rwanda there are lots of companies, I can think of about 10 supplying lab equipment.  But they are more than 10.

Interviewer: They are more than 10?

Respondent: Yeah, different types of equipment of lab equipment.


Question 19
Interviewer:   And the next question is about private partners, and if there is a PPP so how interested are private partners in participating in PPP, we want to understand what the main questions are when it comes to participating in the PPP. So what are the biggest incentives to participate in the PPP, and on the other hand what are the drawbacks for them?

Respondent:  So, mostly for lab, we see PPP happening for big equipment those that require a lot of reagents those are the ones often used as they are the ones that accept to have PPP kind of contracts, and also there is a portfolio that is required because smaller companies, smaller firms they don't, like to wait, they prefer to sell and just leave. So it's mostly the big equipment, those that require a lot of reagents, and those that are backed by an important portfolio.

Interviewer:   When you say important portfolio what do you mean exactly? 

Interviewer:   That can be able to recruit local representative after installation those that can even bring reagents in advance and be ready to supply at a moment notice, and contracting with the government means that there will be emergencies. Let's say if there's an estimation of the quantity that is needed, there will be always surplus or less. So, someone who was able to be flexible and is not threatened by small limitations or small challenges and can be able to have trained technicians who are ready to support technically for the maintenance repairs and everything at a moment notice. And also, most of them do not have replacement equipment, they can't afford to have equipment to supply once one is broken.
But with PPPs, we obliged them to have a replacement within 24 hours of the one broken, so, those are things that are important and also considered by suppliers or by investors when they want to go into this kind of contracts.

Interviewer: So, yeah, that's interesting. So what you have listed may be considered as drawbacks for some of the potential private partners that wants to engage in PPP.  But then what are the incentives for them to come and work with you as the government what will motivate them, what are the different factors that can motivate them to participate?

Respondent: So incentives, there are two kinds of incentives, there is one which I will not maybe have more details on, the one provided by RDB. If a company that is coming to invest in Rwanda or with an important portfolio, there are some incentives on taxes or on investment that I can’t give the details of because I don't know, but with us, with RBC, with NRL, mostly we provide the support they need we might provide them space where to install their machines, even the way to work. There are different possibilities, which can be discussed, but the one that comes to mind is the availability of an infrastructure or a space where to work from.  And, of course we planned together and we gave the support technically, where they need.

Question 20
Interviewer: What are, or, could be the plans in place to support public sector financing of diagnostic? So, for example, we have different sources of funding in Rwanda for the health sector, what are these sources of funding that are expected to be used for financing the lab diagnostic? So now we have some source of funding but in the future, are we thinking about other source of funding?

Respondent: I think, as you know, the government of Rwanda works with different development partners there are budgets provided by the World Bank, Global Fund, CDC and I think that is going to continue with some point of course, I can't attest on that. But we are continuing to make inquiries contact new development partners I wouldn't say a final list, but those are the main ones.

Interviewer: Yeah, and then locally, if you think about domestic resources, they need plan on how to leverage on these domestic resources to increase funding for lab diagnostic to support just like lab diagnostic in the future?

Respondent: You know, the National Laboratories presently improving on their services, to be able to monetize, some of the services and well not privatized but to get some income.  So that's one way to increase the funds used in Lab. But also, there are local partners, potential partners that are available we saw during this COVID, a lot of Rwandan companies responded to the call to support technically or financially and provided donations but also the partnership was good. So, I see potential as well for local companies, local institutions and also, of course NRL activities.

Interviewer:  So, you were saying that NRL is improving services to generate more incomes. So, can you give more details on that? So, what are they exactly doing and these incomes come from people who are using services and which services exactly?

Respondent: Maybe just one example is the COVID19 testing services, they’re generating some income from that.

Interviewer:   Okay, so we tried to give the conversation, broad on PPP in general because based on your feedback you were not involved in the AHDP- PPP design process. 


Question 21
Interviewer: And so is there anything else you would like to discuss or add to this discussion on public private partnership in the lab that we did not discuss but you think that this is something important that we should know.

Respondent:  Not really, just want to thank you for involving me and I would be happy to answer any follow up question.

Interviewer:   Okay, that’s good. Thank you. Thank you very much for taking your time to discuss these PPP and also thank you for being open to any follow up questions in case we have.







































































