Question 1
Interviewer:  Thank you very much. So, please, can you describe your involvement in public private partnership process under this African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda?

Respondent:  Just make sure I understand the framing of the study, for the topic what exactly is included in the African Health Diagnostic Platform, does that pertain to the recent investments by the European Investment Bank, or what exactly is included in that?

Interviewer:  Rwanda, alongside Kenya, Ethiopia and Ghana has been selected to assess "African Health Diagnostic Platform (AHDP) Evaluation, focusing on evaluation of Public-Private -Partnership (PPP) initiative or a form of contracting modalities and this platform was created in order to improve clinical laboratory services in the mentioned countries to contribute to the quality of health care. Okay, there is this European Investment Bank with BMGF in supporting the implementation of AHDP in these countries, and also they give support through CHAI in technical assistance of the work. (JHU)John Hopkins University has been contracted to evaluate the design, the process and also the impact of AHDP Evaluation in these four countries, In Rwanda JHU through CIICHIN has the role of documenting and evaluating the process and the outcome of the model. CIICHIN (Center for Impact Innovation and Capacity building- For Health information and Nutrition), A Rwandan Research Company that is led by Professor Jeanine Condo.

Respondent: Okay, just to clarify, you know my involvement with the lab was directly with the RBC and working on a specific investment from the European Investment Bank, I think there have been different processes that are falling slightly different channels, and, you know, the one I've been involved in was directly under the leadership of RBC. You know negotiating with EIB and WHO is also involved because there will be providing some technical assistance it's to invest in a new laboratory for National Health laboratory services (the NHLS). And that's I guess it is a form of PPP.
So that what, I was involved in I know that CHAI has been involved in different work with laboratory services. And they had a workshop in Musanze, if I remember, to which I couldn't attend because I just couldn't go, so I missed that workshop in Musanze, and I don't know if there have been other engagements, you know myself haven't seen, I haven't had any contacts with CHAI, I mean I'm not aware of any other meetings or any other engagements, or emails with CHAI or in regards to any other thing else in regards to the laboratory you know after I missed that workshop in Musanze. I'm not sure what happened I'm not in the loop on that one, the one I'm involved in is the one directly with RBC and EIB, but CHAI is not involved in that. So if your questions are particularly about CHAI’s projects and that specific project that's led through CHAI I really have almost no information on that one.

Interviewer:  Okay, Thank you very much, we go through the questions, and you will respond to provide the information that you have.  

Question 2
Interviewer: Are you familiar with the African health diagnostic platform, which is being currently discussed in Rwanda?

Respondent:  No, I'm not. I can't say I am honestly.

Interviewer:  Yeah.

Interviewer: So, did you discuss about this kind of PPP? With the RBC, in the meeting that you were involved in?

Respondent: No, I mean the discussions we were having with RBC, I mean this was obviously, initially with DG of RBC and the whole team at RBC and then you know WHO is there as well. But there is a group of core group that set up to work on, on the future reference lab for RBC, and that's under EID funding plus, EU delegation funding and their order to set up a new basically. I think it's about security level three, I think that was the latest to set up key laboratory services.
Well, it would be a central hub for the country, including a decentralized network of laboratories in each district, not the district, province. So,   that's been the discussion, but I've never heard the branding AHDP, in brought up, you know the discussions that we were having were not coming under that umbrella.
So it's not that I'm not familiar with the details of AHDP, but I don't know. You know  that's why I asked initially, which program it is, what’s in the scope or not because I have been involved in separate process I think so AHDP is not  something I'm familiar with, I'm not sure who's using the branding and who is involved in that but I'm not.

Interviewer: Yeah, maybe it's a problem of name. But otherwise, it should be the same process because the initiative were being developed into public private partnership. So we can go through the question and you will provide any information that you may know.

Question 3
Interviewer: So, according to what you know what was the process of negotiation over the PPP, you know?

Respondent: So the process, I was involved in, is to negotiate two separate grants that come from European Union. One is a large 20 million euro grants from the European Investment Bank (EIB). And the second grant is a direct grants to WHO to provide technical assistance to support the project and provide expertise to ensure that, the lab infrastructure project is carried out well and that's a separate grant.
Let's see if I remember a million and a half or 2 million to WHO are coming from the EU delegation. There's two separate processes that we have been involved in. So,   that's the limit that makes sense, I have not been involved in the Gates Foundation negotiations or anything with CHAI. So, that's I’m not familiar with. So I can only speak with the direct discussions with EIB and an EU. So, that's been a process led by RBC.
I think the EIB one was the most transparent process, because it's directly between EIB and RBC. And so, RBC has been working on a project plan, putting together project documents with infrastructure plans with service planning.  So, that's been kind of an interactive process that was involved or led by a core team appointed by RBC in which I participated and also WHO was invited. So it was a team of people that worked on that, and that was submitted to.                                           So, you know there was some back and forth with EIB mostly around some questions or procedure and procurement planning and things like that. But overall, I think it follows the standard EIB procedures. And the other part, the second grant, that's the direct grants between EU delegation in country, and WHO that so, there was a bit more difficult to manage because the terms of reference for the WHO (TA) technical assistance was kind of going in parallel, they initially initiate and draft terms of reference, to which wi
l provide input, but as far as I can tell those inputs were not really considered.
So there was a separate negotiation process between WHO and EU delegation. So there was disconnect, in which RBC was left out at some point as far as I could tell. So I am not sure in the end, what WHO is suggesting is really going to have an impact. And it's going to be really aligned with the rest of the bigger projects under the EIB funding.  So that remains of question mark for me, because there is a bit of disconnect in those two. As far as the other funding, I really don't know what the negotiations were because I don't know if there are additional funding under AHDP that I don't know.

Question 4
Interviewer: Thank you very much so from the process that just described it seems that WHO had some kind of sticking issue. So, do you know any of the sticking point around this PPP design?

Respondent: Well I think, you know, you have different stakeholders, working in different manners, and that in itself creates a challenge right I mean you have EIB that works in a very administrative form and their procedures.
Then you have WHO, they work in their typical ways with their hierarchy and their structures and their experts that they send in from Geneva or wherever. Then, you have the country teams here some of the partners. And so, you know, RBC, they’re busy, they have their regular jobs and people were kind of appointed to try to help out, put together a project proposal for this on top of the regular jobs so they put together a co-team to try to work on that, as far as I could tell I think it's good to appoint people to work on a specific task.
For myself I think I was appointed as the vice chair of that task force core group that was supposed to work on that national health laboratory services. But, you know, I think for a while for a few four months, actually, maybe even a year, and the accountability of our responsibilities, or mandate was not clear so I was not sure what I was supposed to do in that team what I was responsible for, who was supposed to have what negotiations, what discussions. 
You know, did I have authority to go after, to ask a person to be accountable for delivering XYZ. So, I think it's good to have a core team. But then if you're going to appoint people from different organizations.  It's hard to come in, you know, imagine, for example me I'm working for ENABEL, I'm appointed to the team led by somebody from RBC, but I don't know if now am I supposed to go after people and hold them accountable and so, these lines of power, or accountability are not clearly established and there is the internal discussions that are happening in which the core team is not involved as an institution, and nobody knows. You know nothing is formal.
I don't have a clear mandate. So, when I talk to people I don't know if they know that I'm part of the core team or not, and they may be wondering who is this guy and why is he writing to us, you know, and so, if there's a team or a task force that set up it needs to be absolutely clear mandate and authority to be a managing and responsibilities of the different people in the core team respective responsibilities need to be absolutely crystal clear and communicated to everyone.
Because it can't work right I mean, on one hand, it's very hard if there are discussions happening on the side, but, then the core team is not in the loop. They don't know who's responsible for what you know, there’s timeline, but there is no follow up on the timeline we're falling behind but nobody knows who is responsible for following up on the different tasks. So all of that is unclear. There are delays, so, that was a bit confusing to me. 
So, if you're going to manage entities, you know, who's going to manage EIB, who’s going to manage WHO.  All of that is very complex and it's to be very clearly established and I think that's where you know it fell short, in my opinion  that kind of structure of managing the PPP, you know, it needs to be something really strong, because the PPP is complex, and it doesn't work like, you know, your usual single organization project right, you have to coordinate across different teams that do other things and that work very differently so,  you absolutely need to  have a new system of working together.

Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, do you know where it stands now?

Respondent:  As far as I know, I think  again, last week I was on personal leave you know besides, I know there's been a lot of movements  last month, and I think this was submitted to EIB for consideration , so  it was finalized and submitted as you could tell.

Question 5
Interviewer: So, who has been involved in the initial design of that PPP?

Respondent:  So, initially it was mostly the leadership of RBC, so, obviously, you know the initial leadership was under the DG of RBC so at the time was the Former DG he created a task force to work on this, the chairman of the task force or core team was the former head of Department of Biomedical services and I can't recall exactly what name we ended up with but I was the vice chair. It included also different members the head of MTI from RBC you know what I'm talking about medical maintenance, equipment and infrastructure and all of that. So there was a deputy DG, there was the coordinator of SPIU from RBC, there was WHO and the person changed at some points, but there was somebody from WHO, there was someone who is acting as kind of support, technical assistance to RBC.
And then we involved at some point around the Housing Authority. I think we invited also MINECOFIN, I think that was it, and I may be forgetting someone that because it could have happened last month and then, you know, they may have consulted with other ministries.


Interviewer: Yeah, There were other ministries, also?

Respondent: Yeah, Rwanda housing authority and MINICOFIN, and maybe others I'm not sure I would have to dig through my emails because you know I know a lot happened in the last couple of weeks. 

Interviewer: Anyone from the ministry of health?

Respondent: I mean, yeah, I mean, to the extent to which RBC is under MOH, so, in a way, you know.

Interviewer: That's good. Okay, so, how the initial design changes during the deliberation.

Respondent:  So, the initial design was very rough I think the project has different stages you know, now as part of the procurements, part of it is the design. So phase one of the project as part of the work that's supposed to be carried out under EIB funding as well as under the WHO funding.
They're supposed to come together to produce a plan, whether it's an infrastructure plan as well as a design plan and service delivery plan the wind chimes harder lab is supposed to work and therefore, what the building is supposed to look like what kind of equipment they need. So that's not fully in terms of the end of the design of the deliverable that's still going to evolve, quite a bit, but initially, you know, I mean there were some initial discussions or vision, where, you know, I think the initial vision was that it was supposed to be well beyond a lab. 
It was supposed to be basically a new RBC building a full RBC with research with lab with teaching with a huge facility. That was the dream or division initially, that's supposed to look like Robert Koch Institute in Germany or some kind of big you know public health agency that's doing a lot of different things with auditoriums and what not, and so there was difficulty initial vision and I think with the interest of the EIB and what they wanted to support. I think that you know that’s kind of became a bit more focused on the lab facility with, I think there's also  kind of a teaching room and so forth, but I think the project from the initial vision had to be scaled down a bit due to funding constraints.  Actually you know what I do remember in the very early stages of the discussions that was about two years ago, CHAI was involved at the time, you know, it was still under RBC.
So, there were some discussions where the DG of RBC invited CHAI, myself and must design. So that’s when CHAI was involved. So, they were invited to come in the brainstorming discussions in terms of how that vision was going to look like. So also CHAI, came there.  There was, I forgot the name of the people who were there, but there were two people from CHAI, who came 

Interviewer: It was maybe? Country director?

Respondent: No, not the country director No, it was a couple people who were husband and wife. And I would have to dig out who they were, but I don't remember their name out of my head, it’s been a while. So they participated in that, in those meetings. There were a few meetings. Initially, that were actually informal meetings, and I remember the people from the CHAI asked who was leading the procurement of the project, they asked whether that was ENABEL funded project, or who was funding the project, which is when we have started discussion procedure. Here, you know, is this the procurement procedure is this brainstorming and what is this process.
And, I think that's when we realized, I think in order to move forward, this has to be more structured. And, it can’t be an informal brainstorming situation. So, I think that's where things got put on hold for a while and then, later that core team was put together. And then, I don't think there were any further discussion must assign.
As far as I know that formal process was started but  I haven't heard from CHAI, since, specifically for that EIB projects they are kind of just after, yeah, they were asking about the procurement, then I think  they wanted to be a better in that process. So, CHAI was going to be not like a development partner, but they were going to be applying for funding right, so, they were going to be a contractor in that project which is where things get a bit strange, because you have different organizations not on the same foot right, so, it would be strange to have donors, working on the design or putting together the projects, but then involving organizations who are going to be applying or bidding for the project. So, that creates I guess conflict of interest and so maybe that's why  CHAI was not involved in the  discussions, because  they wanted to be applying  for the funding. These carrying out the project. Now, this has gone back, I think almost two years now so I remember, this is so 

Interviewer: Very good. I Think so. As you know there were so many changes and how do the changes would affected the process, or would have affected the process? 

Respondent:  Right, well when I think back you know, from the very first kind of informal brainstorming, that we have two years ago and  I think  the confusion of the lack of clarity of respective accountabilities led to us, not knowing who was supposed to, who was responsible for what. And I think that led to delays, you know, when you have unclear accountabilities. You don't know who's responsible for delivering something and by when and if they don't, then who is supposed to come after them and tell them, you're supposed to deliver, you didn't deliver. So who is supposed to do that right? So, what, when you don't have their responsibilities.
I mean as the vice chair I never knew what my role was, you know, whenever  I would reach out to the chair will ask, am I supposed to do something here. The answer was always oh let us figure out internally. Okay. So, I had no idea what I was supposed to do. So I guess then, you know there were some discussions that were supposed to happen but again this was not very clear.
Hiring a project manager was to be who will have that mandate right because I think  we did realize that we didn't know who was supposed to be managing the activities and the timeline, I mean it wasn't clear what the mandate so we thought well maybe we do need a project manager, type of person profile.  But so things were just, even today I mean I know that they managed to do like a team effort and submit the proposal to EIB, but I don't know who will have the time, be working hundred percent of that on that and to ensure that it gets done in the time they have.

Interviewer: So, is this kind of frustration you felt as vice chair of the task force was also felt among other team members?

Respondent: So I know it was felt by my colleague, who's working with RBC as a technical advisor so you know he's the one who was pushing to hire that project manager type of person it was clear that we needed a person like that, and you know it was not his role or to be acting as a project manager. So, yeah,   I know he was feeling the same.
I think it was a broad consensus initially when we brought up the need for Project Manager. I think people agreed, and we added that in a minute. You know, I think everybody in the core team agreed that we needed a person and we put it in the minute that we need that person. So, that there was a consensus, but I don't know, you know in terms of the next steps of who's supposed to lead the recruitment, how, and again, that's another thing who's responsible for hiring the project manager and I don't know how it was supposed to get done, you know I don't do the recruitment so I don't know how that happens. So yeah, I do think that was a shared feeling among the different members.

Interviewer: Yeah. So who has been championing of this PPP support?

Respondent: So, you know, the division has always been under the umbrella of the DG of RBC that I think if I had to name a champion I would say he was the champion behind it, right? So, the DG of RBC was the champion. But, you know, clearly, he has other responsibilities, which is why I think he appointed that core team.


Interviewer: But what you did under this division was not clearly channeled? Who was the chair of the task force?

Respondent: So the chair of the taskforce was the former head of Department of Biomedical Services

Interviewer: Yeah. Meaning that he was not owning the process?

Respondent: So I mean, I don’t want to blame him.  What I can say is that  the mandate of that core team was not clearly established so when you don't have a clear mandate for either the team as an entity or individuals within the team, it makes it very hard to do anything right so on.
So, I think that the core team as an entity has always been a bit ambiguous and I don't know if I I asked for clarity on those terms of reference, but I don't think we ever finalized those terms of reference for the core team. And then I had to go and leave in January, so, in January I was away so I don't know.

Interviewer: And it was the same scenario with before the new HOD was alert for example, so it was the same maybe the new HOD was coming in, maybe not owning it. And the DG having the overall vision, but not really involved. So, what the same with that old team. Because we used to have, for example the former HOD and colleagues from national reference lab. Do you think that ambiguity was due to this change?

Respondent: So I guess it’s a good question. So, yeah, the turnover at the National Lab did not help, you know, there was definitely a change. People have their usual responsibilities, I think that the former HOD was doing his PhD at some point in Belgium. So he had the other things to worry about. Then the current HOD changed. So, you know, I don't know all the inner workings of RBC and what's going on.
I'm not aware of that. But, I mean, all I can see from the outside process was led by the DG, and then, I don't know. I would show up to the meetings, I don't know who else was invited or not invited. Or maybe who was invited but couldn't come. All I could see is when I showed up to the meetings, the former DG was there and the team was there, the people from CHAI was there and I was there.
But that was like two years ago and then we had these kind of informal discussion, it was an informal group at the time that two years ago, before it is  kind of transitioned into a more formal task force. So, I'm just trying to remember, or you know that there was at some point, there was a meeting at RBC HQ, where I remember, the former HOD was there. I was there for one of the meetings at least maybe two, I don't know, that was held at NRL. So, different people you know we're involved at different points over the evolution of that project. So initially we started with that smaller team at HQ of RBC in Remera, and then we had a couple of meetings at the National Lab, with the different people and CHAI was there as well.
Like for example, you know, CHAI, whether this was where they come in, what did they do. What do I do, you know it, that was all kind of unclear, and people kind of contributed and on a voluntary basis? But, yeah, so, and you don't know, it wasn't clear who was leading it and are the steps, we didn't have a clear roadmap, things were a bit and hoc. Then as you said you know people change. So, you know, things got lost and it wasn't clear. I didn't feel a very strong leadership, or ownership.
And clearly there was a good vision or strong vision, initially, but then, you know, like the people handling and on the grounds like the people managing the project can have changed and that got lost and we didn't know who was leading it initially.
As you said the former HOD and the HOD of biomedical services left and then, I've seen. I was trying to catch up the emails from last month and I see that HOD of MTI now has been trying to push things forward. So, she somehow started to lead the process. I think so yeah.

Interviewer: Yeah, understand that. OK, so the change has affected them. The problem with this ownership, even if the vision was a clear, at least 
Respondent: I think the initial vision was good I think it was. You know, I think the overall vision and the kind of the strategic direction was good. It's just that when it comes to implementation and getting organized I think the work plan and accountabilities that’s where things got confused.

Interviewer: Do you think that there has been any actors trying to propose opposite direction from the main actor working in PPP?

Respondent: Opposite directions, I wouldn't say opposite directions, but, I think one thing  what we realized is that, from the very early discussions you know when  CHAI was involved they made a clear statements that they wanted to bid for this project so they wanted to be funded to work on it. So, you know they wanted to claim the part about design of the concept of the project, the National Lab, but they wanted to work on the design, they’re not infrastructure experts so they didn't want to work on construction parts, but they did want to work on the design of the lab.
It’s supposed to work and all of that so they clearly said that was their interest, and they wanted to bid for it whenever you know that's why they asked me if this is ENABEL funding and how is it going to work so that's why I knew they had an interest in that. But they clearly wanted to position themselves for that component of the design, 

Interviewer:  To bid for the design?


Respondent: Yeah so they wanted to bid for that element. And in this case, I guess they could sense that there was going to be funding coming in, and they wanted to position themselves to bid for it so it's a bit of a weird situation where you have a technical partner that you work with, but then they wanted to bid for funding.
So then you start to ask yourself questions wait, well, at what point does it stopped we stopped working like partners in the health sector and it becomes a relationship between funder, and applicant that's where it gets a bit tricky right because we meet all the time right and we need to tie all the time in different meetings and, but at some point, can't you work with your partners and you have to like compartmentalize what you're working on, and you have to exclude people to keep fair procurement process. That becomes difficult right at some point you have to draw the line and to worry about so anyway, so, that was that question which I can rely on.  And then at some point, there was the question of WHO.
So the WHO is negotiating directly with the EU delegation to get technical assistance funding to support the EIB infrastructure project like the construction and equipment all the big project, but then WHO they were negotiating bilaterally under their own processes and doing their own thing, basically. So, to go back to your question. Means, it's not that they were pulling it in opposite direction but they were pulling in a direction that was not aligned with the timeline and the deliverables of the EIB infrastructure project I mean they said they were going to provide support for the project.
But the project wasn't clear how what they were proposing had anything to do with the EIB funding. How was it supposed to be coordinated? How did the deliverable much? How are they going to deploy their expertise to work with the team?
So none of that is clear it's as if it's two separate things, and I have no idea how it's supposed to work together because that's their explanation that they're supposed to be providing support to the EIB funded project, the 20 some million dollar project, but I don't know, I still don't understand what's the value add for this project for the EIB project.
I mean they say to provide technical assistance. Yeah, maybe, probably, but I don't see, I think the two things are not aligned yet and there was definitely closing. And the two things are a bit disjointed in my view, I may be wrong, but that was my impression.

Question 10
Interviewer:  So, how would the PPP design address key considerations to improve the access of laboratory diagnostic If PPP is proposed?

Respondent:  Well, when I think about PPP, and the question is why PPP? Right? You know, what is the answer to the PPP is bringing that can't be filled or provided by the government, or partners, you know, in the usual way of working, I would say PPP is providing a solution to something that’s not being currently met, the PPP has to ask itself, Well, why do we exist, what are we bringing, and why do we do a PPP?  If it is complex, right, it’s not an easy thing to put together.
It's not an easy thing to manage, and it's not an easy thing, you have to align different organizations working together with different interests. So, you don't do it lightly, it's not the usual way of working, where the government would approach a donor say, hey, can you fund this. Yeah, sure. Here's the money. Let's go, right?
PPP is supposed to be partners, everybody wants to get something out of that you have the government, you have a private entity, you have development partners, and you have civil society, a whole bunch of people involved trying to work together, contributing equally, to get the results that can be achieved ,otherwise, I think there is a key design question that needs to be asked ,you know, early on why PPP and is it  supposed to work and what it's supposed to deliver to whom, and why. So all of these things, and who's going to manage it, right? Who’s going to lead it?
Who's going to ensure that, who's going to manage the partnership. So you need to  find a way of managing all of that and working actively to maintain the partnership and identify issues and PPP is complex, you have to know why you're in, in the first place, and why you want to get out of it, and why or where it's going and find a way to resolve issues. As far as I know we've never discussed that in this order.

Interviewer:  Do you think that PPP can improve the availability of equipment and the reagent, and also improve the quality and efficiency? What do you say about the affordability? If the PPP is approved can you elaborate more on quality, availability, efficiency and affordability?

Respondent: I think it can be very powerful, it can be very affordable, very effective. But, again, you know, there is some kind of, goes back to the initial design question, or is it set up and why and how is it going to work, if you have a dysfunctional PPP.
It's meant to be a failure, it is going to be inefficient, it's going to build the image of “white elephant” or is meant to build something that nobody wants or needs and people are going to look back and say well how did we end up with this, right?  You know, it only works if from the very get go, the project was planned carefully, the rationale was established carefully, the right team was put on the table and then, you know, the project was then carried out,  managed very closely and I think it can work very well, just, It doesn't happen by itself.
You know, PPP unless you manage it practically is not going to be an automatic., and naturally, harmonious process, will be tensions in the PPP that you have to manage every day, in order to get to an optimal results, because by design that you are putting together very different organizations and people together, that are not used to working together.
And if you don't actively manage that you’ll end up with the catastrophe. So,  I think, you know, it goes back to the initial design and team setup and management and responsibilities and it goes back to that, be able to have a very good  product. If that's not there, then it's not going to be either effective or efficient or affordable or anything.

Question 11
Interviewer: Thank you very much.  So, what factors, do you think, changed the discussion around the PPP? 

Respondent: Well, I would say all of them can have a role, or, maybe, should play a role I mean ideally, you should consider every different risk or every one of those factors, assess how they're going to influence the project.  You need to analyze also which stakeholders are on the table. What is their influence what is their interest, why they're on the table?
You know, obviously there are financial considerations, the question of, at some point, you also have to consider a tradeoff so, you can't build a state of the art, unique, super rare and super advanced research and lab facility in every single country in the world, because that's not the way, even in Europe, or anywhere, it's not efficient or effective or you build a network, right? You know, you don't need to do like every single rare test, you know, in every single place because if you do a couple of years it's not effective or efficient to invest in those machines. So, I think all of those considerations have to come into play and be considered, you need to have a look at those and do kind of a risk assessment and risk management plan and you have to have a hard look at a lot of those questions and they need to enter into the discussions of design and project planning.
At some point, all the stakeholders on the table need to make the decision, have a discussion how to make a decision on these tradeoffs and consider the different imperatives in terms of quality access, affordability funding available. What the country wants to invest, where they're willing to invest where they think they'll get out of it, whether financially better for the population.
And sometimes, you know, you may value service to the population more than the financial return which is fine, it's a political decision but that needs to be answered explicitly, right to say okay well we know will be losing money on this but this is why we're doing it, right? Because, I mean I don't know where those discussions took place but I wasn't part of those discussions but yeah they definitely need to be considered.

Question 12
Interviewer: Yeah, Thank you for the comment so, if the African health diagnostic platform is providing for example technical support, and facilitating the financing for this PPP, how would the availability of this support affect the PPP design. 

Respondent: Well, I guess you know if there is a new player coming in consideration AHDP or anyone else. I mean I don't know them. I don't know the network, I don't know their interests and I don't know their contribution or their strength.  But, with any new partner interested. You have to do a kind of revisit, you know, what you can do. It brings a new player on the table, new potential possibilities, but also, added complexity, but maybe things that were considered earlier on in the project.
And maybe put aside because not feasible or not sustainable or not adequate with the setup of the partners at the time would have to be reconsidered, if you have a new player, different vision may be bringing  an original aspect or continental aspects of networking and so forth. You know that brings in definitely a whole new dimension to the project.
That may have been put aside, at the time because maybe that was lacking. So I think, if you have a new, whether it's I think a lot of financial partner. I think you need to put things on hold and reconsider how this changing things, whether you need to review the initial vision, or you need to reconsider the scope, or I think you have to revisit everything basically I mean it does have to take a long time that you definitely need to pause, you know, bring everybody around the table and reassess. You know where things stand and how things are changing because of that.

Question 13
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, let us go for the context now. So that was the design so now the following question will be about how policy context and the different stakeholders shaped the PPP design?  
So the policy context for example the following question would be:  how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for PPP? 

Respondent: That's a good question. I know, I'm trying to recall if at any point in the process we stopped to consider, or to assess the policy on PPP and Sorry, I'm just quickly running through the different stages in my head, trying to remember.

Interviewer:  Take time.

Respondent: I don't think we ever analyzed the policy, the government policy on PPP , you know, what's included how, what are the criteria,  the framework, and whether it's a party or not supportive, or what, you know,  what some of the key considerations in that policy. I mean I don't know if maybe some of the other team members did it, but it was not something explicit, right?  It’s not something that we did as part of a structured effort or work plan maybe it was done but I don't think we did it as a team. We did not analyze the policy on PPP or evaluate to discuss it as a team, so maybe it was done, but I was not involved in that. So as I know, we didn't do it as a team that policy analysis.

Interviewer: Thank you, but based on your experience in health sector you have been there for a couple of years.  So, do you think that on policy perspective, when the regulatory framework, do you think that these legal and policy, supportive to PPP or are opposing it?  So do you think that they had some kind of obstruction or favoring context?

Respondent:  It's a very good question and honestly, I have to admit my limitations I mean I personally never read the policy documents, the government policy documents on PPP, and how are regulated how they're supposed to work and so forth, and I know RDB is supposed to be coordinating that, and I know that the government is very open to the idea of PPP. Now, you know, in terms of what I witnessed over the last 12 years is that we witnessed a lot of interest in PPP, lot of discussions, there is a lot of buzz around PPP.
But I haven't seen that take off into something very effective or, you know, the big thing that's working flawlessly or I know there's been different initiatives, even you know the health posts are some of PPP. But whether you know these PPP or through public private partnerships, like equal partnerships. I think it goes back to my comment earlier I think a PPP is a different animal that requires dedicated management and oversight. You can’t do it as a side job, you can’t have your regular job, and then do a PPP on the side, and it needs to be like a dedicated enough management team overseeing the PPP to make sure it works. Because it's really complex it touches on different sectors, it goes outside of your usual sector, uni-sector, and work streams. So, you know, again your question is about the policy so I haven't read the policy so I don't know how the policy caters to that. But, maybe there is room to do a policy analysis, and to see whether you know whether there is any shortcomings
In the policy in terms of where is it specific enough visits include those questions about how to ensure that the PPP are successful.  Yeah, what is the oversight of those PPP? And when I say oversight is not something like remote, like, where, you know, somebody wants to us to sign a report or something. Now, I’m talking about day to day management, right. So, because in the PPP we have a private actor you have a government actor and they do their own thing, and why is it a partnership, right?  And who's managing that partnership?
Yeah, and that's where I've seen people struggling so I don't know if it's a policy issue, I really don't know I mean I'm ignorant. So, you know I think it may be worth doing a specific policy review.

Question 14
Interviewer: Yeah. So, what other recent or areas experience of the project have there been in country, that can provide lessons for this coming African health diagnostic platform?

Respondent:  I think the things that come to mind are the, well I  only know  the health sector I mean I'm sure there is PPP outside of the health sector, or any other, and what  I mean I  don't know those as well.  I think you know they've done PPP in the health sector with the health posts. They've done it in the lab, as well with partnerships with Albert and there was also a partnership with for sequencing. But there's different PPP partnerships that were set up but you know, unless you're in the partnership. You don't necessarily have all the information to know how the partnership is going, right.
You know, the health posts only have bits and pieces, the lab but bits and pieces. Even about partnership is a bit you know it's a bit mysterious so you know, it's hard to say right how well these partnerships are working and if they can be used as examples.
So, I know there are some, but you know obviously you need to look at specific case studies and study them and assess them individually and see what's working, what's not working. I personally I wouldn't be able to tell you exactly how well they're working, you know, or what's not working.

Interviewer: Yeah, thank you. So, what has been the historic investment and interest from the government in the laboratory diagnostic?

Respondent:  Yeah, I'm in the division where I was twofold, right when one, well maybe more than two fold actually there's different aspects. On one side there is definitely a service delivery components where they want the population to be able to have access to all the diagnostic services to ensure quality care. So that's one and two, there is definitely an element where there is an interest to serve as a hub, a regional hub so an element of where they also wants to think beyond the borders of the country and act as a reference center for laboratory services, but other services as well, or potentially Rwanda could be a hub where some laboratory testing could be done.
So that's definitely part of it. And then, you know, there's also an element of academic and teaching, where they also want to provide excellence in education and teaching for laboratory, technicians and enable well to drive an inadequate workforce, but also to attract further economic developments, right. If you have a qualified staff,  that's going to encourage investors and,  companies to come in the country and,  to bring in their labs, bringing their research facilities, and so on and so forth. 
So there's a multiple facts that I've heard, you know, different forums that fall under the different idea vision I guess for strategic division of the government,  may be more, I may not be remembering everything.

Question 15
Interviewer: So how does the improvement in the laboratory diagnostic align with the government priorities for the health sector? 

Respondent: Well, I think it aligns very well right,  in terms of the access of  components,  access to quality services I think there's a clear alignment there. You know, serving as a regional hub, but I think that also falls in line with rest of government policies. But you thinking about other sectors you know caring to the countries in the region.  I think that's also aligned with the government policy, obviously that goes beyond the health sector but that you know that's same thing for broader development of qualified workforce, the country as well as economic development and attracting investors. I think all of that is really aligned with government policies, I think none of those things are going against it.  It's all aligned.

Interviewer:  What is the profile of the health workers relative to the diagnostic system, including training, cadres, and even unionization? 


Respondent:  Okay. Yeah, the benefit of health workers. Well, I'm by background the clinicians I'll answer first as a clinician, if you have a lab, that's providing reliable analysis, a broad range of different services that you can trust, there's a clear benefit right because you can provide a good patient care, you're confident that you can get the analysis that you need, be able to prescribe the right treatment, so there is a clear benefit in terms of patient care and quality of services.That  includes satisfaction of the providers, to be able to have access to the right diagnostic tools and  provide good care. So I think that there's definitely a satisfaction, you know, some elements that goes to support the health care workers in their work.
And then, it creates different professional opportunities, it creates new career tracks opportunities for development, new training, new cadres that potentially even further specialization for existing cadres, you know, you can do new trainings, learn new techniques.
It creates opportunities, if, as the sector develops, you have new labs, investors, new things that come in, it creates jobs, it is definitely going to help developers of the private sector, definitely opening the door to a lot of possibilities, whether it's also research in academia. So, there is definitely a lot of career tracks and nowadays if you want to develop   your advanced health research, and, you need to have a lab, you need to be able to do lab analysis, you need to be able to run your samples in the country, or in the country you're in if they have a way to analyze your samples.
So, to me it fits well together. In the sense that it really opens the door for many career tracks and possibilities as in any country, you think about the US or Europe like if you think about any kind of health system where advanced research are known, advanced manufacturing are known, and I think a lab is a key element of that.
Now, unionization, I guess, as you’re having a private sector, I imagine those things happen by themselves, right? You know, the professional and not just unions, right?  But professional organizations are going to start to develop. It's not just a union, it's also professional association its regulatory authorities, bodies, right now we have a council for doctors and dentists, we have council for nurses, we have council for Allied, and everything is still a bit weak.
So, as this develops you probably are going to end up with a dedicated council for lab and then union, yeah sure, why not?  So, I think all of that is going to become much stronger, as the lab becomes really workforce that has a voice and a momentum of its own. Yeah, sure absolutely I mean it's going to help with that.

Question 17
Interviewer:  Thank you very much for the answer. The previous question it's about the stakeholders, and I think that you responded to this question throughout our discussion, we can skip it and go to the following:  
So, whose interests, are helped or hurt by laboratory diagnostics happening in the public versus the private sector.

Respondent: It's a tough question. You know, I mean that's something I'm not sure.  I can answer like that, you need to sit down and brainstorm and think through, that helps., I mean what the government wants to do, and the government wants to ensure that the population has access, right? So, in a way, does it help the agenda of the government to expand a laboratory service.
So, in the big picture, yes, it does help the government agenda. Now, the tradeoff is that you may have, you know, as you have it as a growing private sector, you'll have hand over, if you want some of the responsibilities that used to be carried out under the government, right? So, I mean, if the government owns the labs, they overlap but they do the test, they said what they do, how much they charge, how much people pay, you know they have control over it, right?  Including the investments and the revenues on these investments, you know, as   you will open the door to private sector, the private sector will come in, you know they're obviously going to invest money and they do expect some broader news right there, some return on their investment.
So, I would say, in order to be able to answer the question of what is going to help the private sector, I think we have to see what's their interest, right?  you have to analyze what do they want to get out of that which is the first step in the PPP, whenever you are getting a partnership with someone to see what do they expect to get out of that, right?  And that's where it's different from traditional donors. If you're asking ENABEL for money, we are very happy to give you money, right? And if you spend it we are happy.
As ENABEL we don't necessarily expect anything out of it. I mean we like some indicators that you have to meet but it's not something that's just a question of accountability for how the money was spent, it's not something that as ENABEL we need to benefit for, right?  Whereas a PPP is different, PPP implies that as a partnership, everybody needs to get something out of that and that is why you need to do a lot, carefully think about what's in it for everyone who is going on the dance floor.

Interviewer:  So, maybe some questions may help you to respond to the question. Who benefits the most from the joint public-private venture in laboratory diagnostic?

Respondent: who benefits the most?

Interviewer: yes

Respondent: It depends how the PPP was set up if the PPP was not set up carefully, whoever was the smartest is going to benefit the most.  It goes back to design, depends how you set it up if the government is not paying attention, the private sector is going to have an easy ride. So, it really depends on how it was set up at the beginning. If you sign something without reading the final print, it’s very dangerous.

Interviewer:  Yeah, Okay. Who is potentially threatened by the PPP? 

Respondent:  Potentially, everyone because that's the point of the partnership, rights? Maybe they are not going to be strengthened equally for the same things, but everybody going into partnership wants to get something out of it, and what they get out of it is going to vary depending on each organization’s reason why they're going into a partnership.  And normally, if a PPP is working well everybody gets what they want, or some of it at least, but everybody should benefit in the PPP, if somebody is losing, is not benefiting, then the PPP is going to fail because somebody will pull out and forget this.

Question 18
Interviewer: How would the structure of the African health diagnostic platform project itself affect dynamics in the country level? And how have BMGF, CHAI, and EIB influenced the country level, PPP dynamics? And also to what degree did they cross the country landing with the African health diagnostic platform project?

Respondent: Right so I mean, based on what I've observed and considering that I know those two, nothing about the AHDP and considering that the Gates Foundation, CHAI, and EIB, I’m just reflecting back saying that, there have been touched points, with CHAI, with EIB.  Gates I never interacted with so, there seems to be a lot of discussions happening in different places with different stakeholders.
And, I mean, one thing I would say is encouraged to have some coordinated and joint vision, and a stronger leadership. Right now, I think there is a high risk that, a new partner comes in, promising a lot of investments and money and it becomes a new side discussion. You know, there are discussions with WHO, there is discussion with EIB there is discussion between EIB and WHO there is discussion between all these different sides discussions. And there is a big risk for kind of the overall coordination being lost.
And you end up having all these project in silos that create confusion that are disjointed that are not coordinated and kind of lose track of what is what, and the all fits together and who's getting what out of it and so I think that's a big risk and it’s already currently a bit messy situation and I think with a new partner, there is a risk that becomes even messier. So I would really strongly encourage that there is a much stronger coordination that is being done by somebody in the government.


Question 19
Interviewer: So, the following question would be, so how interested are private partners in participating in the PPP? Do you know anything about that?

Respondent: I mean I worked for private sector in the past, so, I think there is different level of interest right in PPP for the private sector. You know, one is pure, see what they call (CSR) Corporate Social Responsibility, which is goodwill, just because it looks nice to do something to help low income countries.  So, that’s one, so, that’s like a separate world, right?  I'm not sure it's a true PPP, or if it's like standards development projects. So, there is that element in private companies, but, when you look at the core business, putting aside the CSR and elements. Normally private companies who are successful, you know they have service or products they sell and they can make money and usually they're good private company, it goes very well. They don't need anybody else to do it, right? When they want to enter in the PPP is that there is something else they want to get out of it, right? So either it's because they want to test a new approach, new product, enter a new markets and new way of doing things that there is something they want to get out of a PPP, and you need to figure out what it is? It could be that, there is a new machine they want to test, there is a new test, and they want to try.
They want to come in a country because it has particular population, they have a particular disease or set of disease. There is a reason why they want to go into the country and do a PPP and not just sell their stuff like they do everywhere else. So we have to figure out why they want to do the PPP because it's a pain to do a PPP, right? It's an effort, so you know, why they want to go through the hustle of doing a PPP.
And you know, there is an interest somewhere, but figuring out what's the interest and ensuring that they get what they want, right?  So, I mean, in order to be successful, you know, at the end of the PPP they have to benefit from it in a way that's interesting for them so that they stay in the PPP. So I would say there is a clearly an interest from the private sector, you know, to be going entering in PPP, but that interest vary a lot from company to company.
We shouldn’t assume that it's the same interest for every company, right?  The interest is going to be very different depending on the company. So, you have to tease out why? What do they want you know that's what, there’s clearly an interest.

Interviewer:   So what are the private partner’s main questions around participating in PPP, what are the biggest incentives? So you summarize a little bit, what are the biggest drawbacks of private so, it depends on the interest as you have said, 

Respondent: Depends on interest and you have to read the fine print first because they want to maximize, they're very good at negotiating contracts, getting the best deals for them. So, you have a small unit, when you’re the government and you're dealing with a private company, you know you have a big private company, it's not dealing like with ENABEL, or you said you know you come in and they want to get the best deal possible, so you have to read the fine print, because they're going to try to get the best possibility for them. So, yeah, definitely will have a strong team of negotiators. They're tough cookies. 

Interviewer: So the government should have the best team to negotiate?

Respondent: Sure, yeah, and don't confuse them for standards development partners, they're not, they are not nice and kind as ENABEL or whoever else.

Question 20
Interviewer: So we are moving toward the end, Sorry to keep you so long, so the discussion was very interesting. But we are moving for the pathway to sustainability and the scale up the things,
So what are, or, could be? the plans in place to support public sector financing for diagnostic in the future, in lens of sustainability and scaling up?

Respondent: It's a good question. I don't think there's a quick answer to that, I think. it's not an easy one because it kind of goes back to, you know, you have to walk through kind of the difference in financing steps and thinking, Well, where does the money come from, right? Is it going to come from Mutuelle, or is it coming from the people paying premium, so, is it going to come from the standard Mutuelle, where, you know, in terms of revenue generation. 
I guess  there is room how does it fit in with the public health, public sector financing, so, yeah you have to consider the aspect of how it fits in with the current public financing schemes, the current health insurances but then there's the question of the provision of care, right?  You know these labs do tests, right? That’s what they do. So, these private, public labs, who pays them and then who makes the money, right?  So, you know, if you have a private lab that does a test, they're going to do tests because they're getting paid, right?  And they'll do as many as they can, maybe they’re going to try to maximize their revenues.
So, at some point you have to figure out how you want to balance out the lab budget, and the lab budget is a huge threat. I think to the public sector financing, because, as, open the market, you'll have more tests on the market and a huge risk of an explosion of a race to do more and more tests. So, there is definitely a lot of mechanisms that need to be thought through to regulate that control that so we don't have unnecessary tests being done. But at the same time, you know seems to be interesting for the private sector, and indeed, and you have to balance out the public sector budgets, you can say, yeah we'll pay for whatever it costs, because it's not the reality in any country, Rwanda is no exception in every country even Germany or whatever they had to figure out a way to control the number of tests being done otherwise you'd be ruining as many as you can.

Interviewer: Actually there are some question which are saying, under the sub question, which different sources of funding, are expected  to be used for financing the diagnostic, and how  the government, has increased the financing support to the diagnostic during the PPP period?  For example, the national health insurance and other things, and also, to think about if the financing plan are sustainable?  Why, and the why not?

Respondent: I think the government has done quite a lot, they’ve been involved in negotiating with different companies. I don't know the details of the different deals or negotiations.  I know that, dealing or interacting directly with different private sectors, you know, ABBOTT deal there is a different deal with the PCR testing and whatnot. So I'm not directly involved in those negotiations so I don't know the details of those deals. I know that the government and RBC probably mostly are involved in those negotiations and discussions. I don't know what's in the details of those agreements.
Yeah, I can speak that, as private companies they're probably trying to get the best possible deal for themselves. But, some aspects are still interesting for the government as well.  So, I know that there is interest on both sides and, you know, discussions that have been happening but I'm not directly involved in that so I can’t tell you what was happening.

Interviewer: Based on the financing system in Rwanda, for example do you think the existing financial mechanisms are sustainable for this kind of diagnostic financing? Why, and why not? 

Respondent:  I think they have the potential to be sustainable, just that they're there. If we go on in an unregulated manner it's not going to be sustainable, because a lab is going to do as many test as they possibly can. They want to milk the cow, as much as they can. And I would say if I have a lab, that's what it would do, right?  I mean you know there's ethical considerations but if you cut down to the essential business you're going to manage their profit and they're going to try to maximize their profits, right?  And that's what any businessman would do, right?  So you know you’re going to try to do as many lab test as you can.
So, that's going to huge risk of potentially exploiting the private sector budget. So, but that being said, that doesn't mean that you can do any lab test, no and it doesn't mean that you can expand or develop your lab test, offering. No, it just means that you have financial mechanisms to cap. What is the lab budget, and how you calculate. As the government, you need to be able to have a budget, right? You need to be able to say, okay, well, next year we're going to spend x billion of Rwandan  francs on lab, and you need to be able to be,  a bit close to that, right? 
So, you need to find that way to control your lab budget, and if it's not regulated lab budget is going to grow through the roof, right? Because the labs, are just going to be sending your bills and you'll have to pay them. So you have to find, you have to set up different financial mechanism to be able to control how that's done on bill,  how many tests they can build,  how they can do the tests, and so on and so forth and what's their margin.
So all of that needs to be regulated and there are different mechanisms, you know, most countries have to deal with that at some point or another, and there is no perfect solution, right?  Every country has to come up with their own way, but there is all kinds of different systems that have been tried regulate, there are two things that are really risks in health, wellness more than that, but there are two things that have shown a potential to be out of control, because it's a bit decentralized and private sector is driving the demand, so it's basically the labs and the drugs, you know, these two things, if left unchecked can just go crazy, right?  And, you know, hospitals are a big cost of course but it's easier to control those because you know you don't have the labs and the pharmacies. There are different dynamics and decentralized smaller entities and it's a lot more complex.  So, these two things have the potential to bankrupt the public sector, which means that they need much stronger regulation.
It doesn't mean that you have to crack down on them but you have to set the limits, this is just going to work. This is how much we can pay. Therefore you know, so you read all of that has to be, you know, defined and packaged really well.

Question 21
Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much that was very interesting. So, is there anything else you would like to discuss about the PPP that we're not covered in our talk?

Respondent:  No, it’s interesting, I'm just curious about a lot of the discussions would be very relevant to the government of course you know. So what’s your plan for, I mean, I understand the clients are more like Johns Hopkins University and the Gates and but, does the government, at some point, how are you going to engage with the government and share your findings with them, you know, is there going to be a platform for discussing this and I'm just curious about enough.

Interviewer: Yeah, exactly because we were able to interviewing so many people for us to be able to deep dive and know how the project were implemented or whether it is on the right direction , and we were able to get different perspectives from different levels. And at the end of the day, the most beneficiary it's the government of Rwanda, and these stakeholders. So the findings should be shared to the government and even the most beneficiaries Funders. Then after we will be able to get different perspective from other countries to evaluate if there can be a best practice to implement in our country.
So, thank you very much for this long rich interview. If this PPP is going to move on to contracting, we may come back to you, if you will allow us then

Respondent:  Okay, well.

Interviewer:  Thank you for your time and I appreciate. 


Respondent:  My pleasure. I'm looking for, I hope I will get to see the result of your work at some point you know this is very interesting 

Interviewer: for sure. 

Respondent: It will lead to interesting debate and discussions in the health sector, so I would love to see the results.

Interviewer: For sure this will run to some point in this discussion in this core group. And I know you are in the Rwandan health sector forum, and you will catch it at any time in the meeting.

Respondent:  Yeah, That's good. That sounds good. Thank you very much, good luck.




























