Question 1
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So can you describe your role as it is related to the laboratory diagnostic in Rwanda?

Respondent: Thank you very much for taking me part of this study, it is my pleasure to participate in interview. My role actually will be as a medical doctor and also a managing director of a public hospital in Rwanda. 

Question 2
Interviewer: Okay. Thank you very much. So, as a medical doctor are you familiar with African health diagnostics platform currently being discussed in Rwanda? 

Respondent: So, I came to cross more of this platform just couple of days ago while I have been reached out to participate in this study and I had actually to get informed about this, otherwise previously I was not aware about this platform. Thank you. 

Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much. We understand that you have not been exposed to this kind of discussion of the African health diagnostic platform. First, I want to ask you some questions about how different factors should influence the design of PPP.

Question 3
Interviewer: So, from your standpoint, what are the key issues that the PPP or any contracting modalities aiming to improve laboratory diagnostic services should focus on or include to be successful? 


Respondent: Thank you very much. Actually, if a private partner can contract with public for the better service of the laboratory there must be a proper treatment plan for the patients. This will actually help in two ways on my point of view, rather those mentioned on the paper will guide in the procurement process of gathering reagents and, or just platform, this means machines and so on. Sometimes procurement process may cause problems of the hospitals actually on timeliness and efficiency. And also without running the stock outs, when private contracts are in, they will help to make sure their business is running effectively.
But, again on other point that means on the maintenance side of the machines that are being used, when they are hold by private partners, they need to be able to hire or to have a well-trained manpower that will have to maintain the machines calibrated and then to deliver accurate results. And I hope that also the competition will make the affordability of the machines and the reagents.
As the country under development, the patients do not have enough money to afford the very costly exams. So the cost effectiveness of the lab tests must be considered. The cost of tests should be related to people’s purchase power and the process should make sure that all reagents are all the time available. Those are the points that I can highlight that will be beneficial for this kind of partnership. 

Interviewer: Thank you. You just talk about the cost effectiveness; can you elaborate a bit mores the PPP can improve in a way of cost effectiveness and efficient? 

Respondent: To my understanding, when we are trying to do the procurement process and having those reagents delivered, sometimes we end up having the issues of the reagents coming because of their half-life, and we end up having some reagents that can be expired or getting them arrived late because of the issues of transportation and so on. 
So these make a kind of loss of the hospital. So if this is the task of the private people that are gathering those needed and delivered at time, I think this will be to their cost and they will be trying to give a good service. And, I think we as a hospital will be only sending samples, and then there will be others that will be at other side of getting their machines ready and well maintained, and also with the reagent available for the all needed exams. So, there will be no worry on the side of the hospitals of getting reagents that will be expired or arriving around to be expired. So this will be a very good side of the hospital and also clinicians. 


Interviewer: Thank you what can you say about some need of priorities, for example, the poorest household and the complicated patients, how this kind of vulnerable group can be taken care of? 

Respondent: Yeah, exactly. When we have all the exams available at the hospital, there will be a chance for those poor patients to be able to get full examination and they are examined and then get treated at the same hospital level without getting those transfers that also are very costly to the patients, that is socioeconomic side of the patients. And those who are very sick patients or complicated cases will get examined and diagnosed and treated at the hospital where specialists will be appointed, and that will be a very good thing to our country as we are getting all specialists appointed at every hospital.


Question 4
Interviewer:  Thank you very much. So, what are the costs and benefits of pursuing a PPP for the lab diagnostic this time?

Respondent: On my understanding, I think there will be a benefit to the hospital as there will be a guarantee of getting all the platforms functional and the availability of reagents and maintenance of the machines. So that means on the side of the hospital you are sure that all the vulnerable patients that you can have, there will be a guarantee that all the time we have all the lab system that will be functional. So that is a very positive point on my understanding as sometimes we end up getting some reagents or broken platforms, and we may experience some periods without getting a functional platform. So I think this will be really very beneficial to have the private sector managing the side of the lab that will be really very important. 


Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, the next series of questions are about how the policy context and the different stakeholders should shape the public private partnership design, or the contract modalities. 

Question 5
Interviewer: So, how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for the PPPs?


Respondent: So, I think my answer is a bit limited on this point, as there is some legal aspect that I have not get crossed with, but on my understanding, we need to have a very regulatory system that has to be in contact with their performance, on a regular basis, and with also the accuracy of the results that are being taken and that can be detected at the early stage for any failure aspect of the system, and then try to see what can be addressed at early stage. So, I think we need to have a very structured way of follow up on this kind of partnership, otherwise it will be a challenge on the health system, functioning. 


Interviewer: Okay. Thank you very much, but can you elaborate more if the current regulatory framework, the current policy, current policies, are supportive of this PPP?

Respondent: I think if I can give you an example, we have in our hospital, we have ABBOTT that we are working together, they have delivered their platforms and these direct contact with them to deliver the reagents. And this is very helpful to our functioning laboratory. And, this is different to the actual way of having the procurement process that sometimes also take time and people may not be able to honor their commitment. So, with the ABBOTT that will be able to maintain their platforms and be able to change their platform where they are deficient and deliver at time of needed reagents it makes life easier. And, we are working actually smooth in our laboratory.

Interviewer: Thank you very much. Do you think that there will be a resistance among policy makers for this PPP? 

Respondent: There are two main situations that I can identify, first people that have that believe of competition can lead to the delivery of a better service. The second is just people that can fear to change from the system to another, because they're not sure how effectively that new system can work.


Interviewer: Yeah. So, how flexible is the PPP to change in government, or government priority? 

Respondent: So, I think it can be flexible after identifying the disadvantages and advantages and how the current system is working and the benefits we can gain from this kind of partnership. So I think a government should look careful the consent to adoption of this kind of partnership because it is very beneficial. 

Question 6
Interviewer:  So, historically, how have public and private sector focusing on health interacted, in terms of trust, collaborative the relationship is?  

Respondent: Thank you very much. As I said, looking at the one we have with ABBOTT, historically there is a success story about this relationship. And it has been very fruitful relationship and very effective at hospital level. And, that helped too much patients coming seeking for medical attention and then be able to get a very good package of clinical examination, laboratory examination, and also imaging. This really improved the good decision making to clinicians therefore a very specific treatment for the disease, which is very helpful for patients.


Interviewer:  And so what other earlier experiences or projects have there been in country that can provide the lessons for African health, diagnostic platform? 

Respondent:   So, the experience is there. I think thanks to the good leadership and a well-structured way to follow the implementation, when all parties are fulfilling their role in the contract. And I talked about ABBOTT it has been a good experience and it has been giving good results. 

Interviewer: So, you talked about that you are having ABBOTT in your hospital. 

Respondent: Yes

Interviewer: So, can you relate a little bit on how this is good experience that the African health diagnostic platform can build on? 


Respondent:  So, ABBOTT just brought the very updated and automatic platform that are able to run multiple exams of different samples at a time and, this actually decreased the turnaround time of the all investigations that have been running out in laboratory, and, now we are able to generate these results, in biochemistry, in immune-serology, in hematology, and other areas in a very short time, at least in one hour. Therefore, the clinicians can make a good decision and start the curative treatment at the very early stage. And, they are keeping their platforms in good status; all the maintenance at a very early stage, preventive maintenance and creative maintenance. 
And, we are able to connect with them immediately and they can deliver the reagents at the time without worrying about the shelf life of the reagents. So that is very practical and we can discuss all the concerns professionally before shipment. And then in our side, we have also to fulfill the payments on a regular basis without also delay. So it is actually a win-win situation.


Question 7.
Interviewer:  How will health system governance arrangements (e.g. decentralization, devolution) affect the PPP design and pre-tender process?  

Respondent: I think at policy level, they need to get these kinds of ideas and set the policy of how things will run, but also at the end users, we have to see their specific needs at their level and end up being able to request the specific machines that can respond to their needs, because all the health facilities are not on the same level. And so, I think the governance, when there is good decentralization and the government need to see above and make a framework of working, and then the hospitals will have the roles of making specifications of what they need, and then they will have the authority to follow up if their needs are very responded.  And then at the policy level have also a way of following if the implementation is going okay and if the needs that were identified before are timely responded to as wished. 


Interviewer: So who should be held accountable for the success of the PPP, or the deliverables under the selected contract modalities? 

Respondent: I think everyone has its role to play, if there is any gap in the policy level that means at the policy level they have to be held accountable. But, again for the implementers of this partnership at the hospital level, they need actually to see if everything is going well and make sure to communicate in case there is any problem so that it can be solved as soon as possible as at the hospital level, they are the ones dealing with the platforms. So, I think actually there should be a concession argument before getting the implementation and everyone get to know his/her part clearly and then he/she can held accountable in case of the failure to play the role accordingly.



Question 8
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So what has been the historic investment and interest from the government in laboratory diagnostic? 

Respondent:  I think, the investment is there from the very performing hospitals at teaching hospital level till the health post. There is a very huge investment done by the hospital. But we have also those investment as a reasoning contract, as I said, as ABBOTT and also others in terms of actually getting all health workers at different levels to be able to do their, the investigations and take decision at early stage. So, this actually has a very huge investment on the government of Rwanda that we have a lot of hospitals and all with labs that are very functional and helping clinicians at their level without getting patients transferred because of investigations not done. 


Interviewer: So, how does improvement in laboratory diagnostic align with the government priorities for the health sector? 

Respondent: So, it would align with the government priorities, because we need actually to get all the population treated and get actually the health system going down to the decentralized level the very remote areas. So that's why the government invested a lot by constructing a lot of hospitals in the district level, and at sector level, now going down to the health post, just for identifying all these infections at the community level and also nutrition status of patients and so on. So, that we can get healthy population that can contribute to the effective development of the country. 



Interviewer: Thank you very much. So what is the profile of health workers relative to the diagnostic system, including training cadres and, unionization and other aspect? 

Respondent:   Yeah, so the training is very organized. Actually we have different universities that are training their student at the university level, diploma level (lab technician), also bachelor's degree (lab scientists), so that they're able to manipulate those platforms and be able to run actually those needed investigations and then when they finish their studies they continue being trained while working at different hospitals to get some refresher trainings or any adaptation of a new system.


Question 9
Interviewer:  So, who do you think that are the key stakeholders that should be involved in developing the PPP and why?  

Respondent: So, stakeholders actually should be the ministry of health as a part of the policy makers, and we need also to involve the legal aspect. If I can say the ministry of justice to have all the legal aspect of those contractors in line with our regulatory bodies and everything, and also the management of the hospitals should be involved to assess the benefits that we could gain from that PPP, because they are the end users they should be part of the decision at the introduction of the PPP in order to embrace those changes. 



Question 11
Interviewer: So, whose interests are helped or hurt by laboratory diagnostic happening in the public versus the private sector?

Respondent: I think the first person who will be interested to get these diagnostic happening in public are the clinicians that need the system to learn quickly so that they can help their patients, regardless of which process, what matters is the time around time of every investigation requested and how fast they can get actually everything. But again the investors actually can get hurt if they are not the one chosen, to be part of the contract to invest in the private area to get profit, in this case things are not available in the private hospitals so that they can attract people in the private sector. But the government can only benefit if their population is treated well even to the lower level when services are being accessed down there so they can be healthy. 

Interviewer: So, in other words, do you think that some people would have the benefit of having the lab or the diagnostic services be accessed in the public as it is in the private sector?

Respondent:  So, on my understanding, I think that if all services would be rendered at a public level probably there will be a private business that would not be functional as usual. So, I think there will be some investors in private that cannot be happy with that because they are making money since all the tests are not in public hospitals so you can find them in private. So I think that's my point of view they can both benefit if they keep running as usual.


Interviewer: Okay, that's good. So, who would benefit the most from the joint public private venture? 

Respondent: First of all, will be a patient, but second will be the clinician, and lastly will be actually the government because the patients, their population are treated effectively at the health facilities. 

Interviewer: So, who would be potentially threatened by the PPP? 

Respondent: So, I think the other part that is not involved in the joint public private venture on my own understanding the one who should be threatened is the investor who did not sign the contract so he/she can be involved in the business.


Question 12
Interviewer: So, how interested do you think private partners might be in participating in the PPP? 

Respondent: So I think for sure they will be interested because they are just making platforms to get their consumables used. If they have a stable contract, a stable areas to invest, they will be sure that they can easily make profits a win-win situation. They just bring actually the platforms and they'll be actually able to run for them. Also actually it'll be a stable market for them. It'll not be a kind of going for a competition or elsewhere. I think this actually will be a very beneficial actually to those who will be winning the contract. 


Interviewer: So what are the biggest incentive for private partners to participate in PPP? 

Respondent: So, the biggest incentive will be the support of the government and the support of the environment of the business, actually which is supportive. That will be the biggest incentive and the security of their investment. And seeing that locally there are other investment that has been going on which can be their lesson to learn on.

Interviewer: So, what are the biggest drawback for private partners to participate in PPP? 

Respondent: So, unstable politics of the governments of a country and security, and that can be actually their biggest drawback and unstable economy of a country I think for my side that can be the biggest drawback of the private partners to invest. 


Interviewer:  So, do you think that private partners working in the laboratory diagnostic in Rwanda have the capacity to participate and deliver on the PPP? 

Respondent: So, I think they have, yes, the capacity to participate as they have shown the ability and the strength to make these things successful. I mentioned above that we have already running ABBOTT a kind of partnership which is working properly. 


Question 13
Interviewer: So, how PPP could be designed to achieve a scale up and sustainability 

Respondent:  So, the design of the PPP should be protective and in case it is not implemented properly there should be a way of terminating the contract. But again, there should be an assessment that monitor if their goals are well achieved on regular basis. so that we can see if the project is running effectively, and if it's responding to the questions identified previously so that we can see, how it'll be going. The regular monitoring and evaluation of the success based on the expectations of this partnership is needed to see if everything is in implementation of the contract. 

Interviewer:  What would scale up look like for this PPP, for example, at the level of the geographical scale up, expanding to other facilities, adding new diagnostic? What do you think in the scale up at national level, even at lower level? 

Respondent: As I said previously, we have different level of hospitals, their needs also are different and their capability to treat are different. They can expand services also going up if they are able to do that. Why not expand to a level of pathology, examinations of the lab. This kind of also partnership can also involve the imaging service, why not? Because we know that sometimes hospitals cannot afford like big machines like CT scan or MRI and so on. So we can scale up with not only the lab but also with other kind of partnerships that hospitals can benefit from. 


Question 14
Interviewer:  What are the plans in a place to support public sector financing over diagnostic in the future?


Respondent: The plans in place that can support that is the political will and the policy that are supportive of that. And we have also human source that are place that are ready to use the new technology. So, I think if everything combined with the political will and the good environment, everything can come together to support those investors. 


Interviewer:  What do you mean by good environment? 


Respondent: A good environment combines the political will, and the policy makers that are flexible to see how they can work together to get everything and being able to have a continuous evaluation. With the support with working together with those investors. I think this is in general, including also a kind of security and other facilities that can attract investors. 

Interviewer:  So, which different source of funding are expected to be used for financing diagnostics?

Respondent: Source of funding can be coming from the services, those services will be sold. So, when you are selling service, then you generate money. That is actually a service that we would sell, and then we generate money. But also you can have partnership with partners that can fund the health system, but the population themselves can also finance by generating kind of insurance. And then insurance can be a source of financing, those expenses and then, but also the government can come in to finance those services and generate money to pay back. 


Interviewer: So, how government increased the financing support to diagnostic during the PPP period? 

Respondent: So, from my point of view when the services are available, you just sell the service and generate money, but by generating money you end up by treating patients and when they are not very sick, they can also participate in different activities and they can generate taxes to the government.     I think government, when it invests in people’s health, it is a factory that helps the government generating money in different ways.

Interviewer:  Is this financing plan, you are talking about sustainable, so, and why, and why not?


Respondent: On my point of view, they can be sustainable if the cost is affordable. So, I think making a good negotiation for low price because the market is big. I think for me, with the experience of managing the hospital, this is very sustainable if it is well managed. 

Interviewer:  So, how are the different source of funding being considered? You talked about, taxes, insurance and income generating. So, how these sources of funding be considered politically viable. 

Respondent: So, then you have to get actually a good political will, as I said, mandatory as it need to be there before anything else, and practically it can be viable because the government has set the guidelines and legal framework for ppp, So the government is ready to raise fund for the viability of the ppp. With a strong system, a political will, and a stable government in ideal situation the financial viability is possible 

Interviewer:  Thank you very much. So, is there anything else you would like to discuss about the PPP? That we have not talked about? 

Respondent: I think we have talked everything; I have nothing to add on that. 

Interviewer:  Thank you very much. If you have the last paper, you can look at it and see if we may have missed any potential respondent. You see the last paper, there's a list of potential respondents If you have went through, you can indicate us which one we have missed out. We can add  them. 

Respondent: I think everything has been discussed, the list is okay, 

Interviewer:  Thank you, we are at the end of our discussion, as I have said in the beginning, if the PPP moves ahead to contracting, we will have second round of interview. And if you agree, we may reach you again in the next few months to schedule another interview with you. Thank you very much.

Respondent: Thank you very much. Yeah. I will be glad to participate. 

Interviewer: It has been very interesting to discuss with you and to gain a lot of experience from your side. Thank you very much. 
























































































