Question 1.
Interviewer:  So the first question that we have for you we want to understand your involvement in the PPP process, under the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda. So if you can please describe your involvement.

Respondent: So I worked as a senior associate on CHAI Rwanda team. I provided the lab technical inputs on the AHDP work alongside my colleagues, one of them had more knowledge in the costing side of the work. The other one had the overall oversight over the strategic direction alongside the global team.  But my role was the lab technical work on the team.

Question 2
Interviewer: Okay. So, we can say that you're pretty familiar with the project. Right.

Respondent: Yes, I am. 

Interviewer: So you participated in each of the state of this process.

Respondent:  Yes, yes. Okay.

Interviewer: And. Okay, the first part of this interview is going to look at the specifics related to the design negotiation.

Question 3.
Interviewer:  So we would like to know how, what was the process of negotiation of these PPP? For example, the process during selection of facilities where this initiative was planned to be implemented, the model that was chosen, how did all this process go. If you can describe that for us?

Respondent:  So what happened was that there was a prior assessment of the lab network. The lab network, where we realized and we have listed a number of challenges. After documenting the challenges in the different lab system areas from policy to quality assurance. We then took a time understanding the entire PPP model, what are the guidelines for Rwanda. So with a clear understanding on the PPP steps, we were able to then propose a number of models, privatization that we thought would address the challenges in the country. And also reduce the cost in terms of running laboratories, and also improve efficiencies laboratory services.                                                                                                                                        
So, we had a quick cross section overview of the laboratories and looked at all the challenges that were there and also looked at the services in the private sector, looking at us or the public sector. and when we looked at the private sector, the efficiencies that would be realized. If we introduced a private sector to the lab systems, then we would be able to realize some benefits for the country. The PPP basically made us go through many other challenges from MINECOFIN that have been collecting data going to the Rwanda social security board RSSB. They were looking at all these packages that they could offer the insurance packages. And we saw that also, there were deficiencies in the amounts that were negotiated. And many of the things that just menus were not tied in with the service offerings at the facility level. And so, we looked at cost efficiency coverage quality and propose some models, but of course it change over time.

Interviewer:  So I would like to better understand, especially when it comes to the models. So because the different models that you proposed, I think you had some discussions.
When you were working on them and finalizing the different models so I would like to know how this process was undertaken. Did you have discussion with also other stakeholders in Rwanda? Who are those stakeholders?

Respondent: So, we had the one discussion with the major stakeholder. The ministry of health, RBC. When we had that it was with Ministry of Health and Rwanda National Laboratory. When we discussed, they realized basically this kind of stating the problem and we had the solution to it. But also we had discussions with the number of other stakeholder’s agreement assurance companies, private sector.
Interviewer:  Excuse me when you say insurance companies. Can you say which ones?

Respondent: We had mainly the RSSB, that was one of those the first one, but also, we looked at the other the military medical Insurance a bit, and looked at the deals that are being activated, the costs that were going into healthcare Laboratory services from those, and their price ranges. So that's what we looked at. Yes, we had discussions with the private labs. We did also with some kind of private labs, I don't remember which one exactly. But I remember like the Lancet, how they offer the services and how much. And then we compared with the how much has been offered and decide. So, well we conducted a number of contacts with hospitals, regional and  referral hospital. And then the other stakeholder was MINECOFIN understanding. We also had the RDB team we had discussions with them. And Of course with our global teams, and we had to discuss a number of modalities, but to the stakeholders really that are off my head.

Interviewer:  Putting together these different models. So they had like you discuss the model, or it was just stakeholders that were involved in providing information.  For example, on cost, on average because we want really to understand, during the discussion on  when you were shaping, designing the different options to understand who were the people in the room. during this step.
Respondent: So, we had a lot of input from the National Reference laboratory and Ministry of Health that was a key people, but also we had a lot of back and forth with some stakeholders who are not really present on site that MINECOFIN and RSSB but the major people we had present in front of us were mainly. RDB and Ministry of Health and National Reference Laboratories and also we had MINENFRA.  
So, we shaped our discussions based on their feedback, and would go back and revise the models, and they would said no, this will not work or this will work, but it was more of an iterative process with the different stakeholders, and we tried to address their models.  

Question 4. 
Interviewer :Okay, so then during the next question is really looking at, I think you had those discussions, a lot of back and forth between the different teams and people are bringing some concerns you trying to address their concerns.
So we want to know what the sticking points around the design were. And if you had some sticking points, how did you resolve them.

Respondent:  One is that when we did this study, we did a feasibility assessment. In the laboratory network, we identify those challenges. Then, we did a feasibility study kind of being a rigorous analysis on technical and financial sites or risk analysis, kind of evaluating the cost and impact implications for such partnership.  But what we got later on was that there was a lot of doubt in our findings from the assessment, because we had 2019 data, they said no, get updated data that captures data maybe from 2020 to 2021.
And that data was not readily available so we had to go back I think last year to get most recent data. So that was, they said no. When you did the feasibility assessment, the lead lab landscape has drastically changed because of COVID- 19, we would go back and do another assessment. So, that was one of the challenges we had to address it by getting more data from the facilities and we indicated that we're using old pieces of data from 2019. The other challenge that we had was a kind of siloed approach to the understanding of health systems, Ministry of Health had a different picture. There was that commercial side of it. The RBC had their own challenges, and they are basically lab based.  Then RDB had things around investments and funding so there was that siloed understanding. The facility, they did the different institutions jointed, including RSSB seem to be disjointed.
So, being dealing with multiple stakeholders caused as a very severe challenge at the time. Because imagine trying to make this one understand that this is there or this one is not helping. One of the things, we went back and did the models, but they told us that these models will not work. I think one of the challenges was understanding things like privatization. This is actually what is there, or, this is something that could benefit if we do co- management. So, that is the full understanding of the different model we reached a point where people were not basically understanding, as if our ideas were ahead of the time. But also there was a very big fear in  the way that I would mention that you have to get a loan facility from the European Investment Bank to revise the budget, I meant to revise the lab system to upgrade it and all the things, then it became a very tricky thing.                                                                                                                     Then there was a beat where we said that he committed best health insurance, the CBHI and government insurance. That would be a slight increment in government input, but with improved efficiencies. He said no, we cannot have additional cost. We need to have zero cost, no contribution from the government if you are going to prioritize this.                                                                                                                                                              So I don't know if you looked at their models intensive today we had a slight increment. Slight increment in government input. So, this was actually rebuffed and said you know what make it zero. But we said if we let it zero, there would be no added efficiencies and benefits to the communities. And then we also had the cases whereby they disagreed with the CBHI analysis rates. The rates were actually disagreed on, so, they disagreed on the rates they said you know what these rates actually are what is standards and we cannot revise them in anyway. So they said this was because to realize sometimes we need that slight incremental directs. Pretty match the market rate of different lab tests or commodities, but this was rebuffed. And so we had to again to tweak our models based on that. Yeah, I think it’s been a while and I'm sorry I tried.

Interviewer: It’s really interesting, we were struggling to get people who were really involved.                                                                                                             Since the beginning to have a better understanding of the process. And I think you have a lot of information as a technician who were involved like, highly involved in all these technical steps. 

Respondent: Yeah. So I think we had a rough estimate that we did an investment of around $20 million to build a structure to expand this surface of service offerings. And we thought that would come from the CBHI and government insurance and in patients. And then the private part now needs a kind of cape index around. Was it 15 million or 10 I don't remember very well I don't have access to those files already.

Interviewer: OMG, you didn’t save them into your computer, for example? 

Respondent: There is a policy that is all the property from these remains, and I think I also had to sign a nondisclosure agreement with a Rwanda Biomedical Center, so I had no authority to take any copies of this file. Okay. So, they were protected by our supervisor.

Interviewer: Oh, I just wanted to understand better the CBHI right so based on  your calculation estimation so you found that the rate, the theory for the CBHI may increases And that's why you had all these people disagreeing with that.

Respondent: Yes, but then if you could introduce a better service offering in terms of the number of tests that can be offered, you could also improve efficiencies in the system, Practice better or services for this population, but this was actually refused.

Interviewer: Yeah, I understand. I think I participated in one of the virtual meetings where they could see also that there was an increasing in the health insurances, especially the CBHI will pay. And I remember that some people were like no, how we can think its increasing. So someone from your team tried to explain that actually this is because we're providing more services also we have more efficiency.

Respondent: So, we had, I think we got stuck on the fighter recommendations, getting their recommendations and their models, because this is the study we took a lot of time, if we had the final recommendation approved by RDB then would be able to launch a tender. And then also contracts offer contract and implement the PPP but we never went to pass that we remained on the recommendations and the models, and we kept with revising that I think we looked at this, the status poor where it was a public responsibility. We look at the under the call session where we had to privatize the entire system. Apart from the infrastructure of the laboratory space, this is a government property. Then we had another model which was called co-management, whereby the aspects of the laboratory like staff, the data, and the infrastructure handled by the government, and then the rest like instruments, procurements, capacity building, those things have quite a control as managed by the private person. But we also had challenges where we said OKAY, if you had a private partner has no control over staff and their compensation, does not have things around patient that are the data tracking and recording. Even we do not understand the modalities over enumeration of the private partner because they'll be getting a kind of commission or after the offering of the service from government agencies, then it would be very hard. So, yeah and that's why the initial models then we ended up in things like sample transport.
So those who are like low hanging fruits towards the end where we look. But we started with the privatization and co management, and then we ended up going to some things that were acceptable transport can we get privatized sample transport. Can we just prioritize may be laboratory accreditation or something like that. I think you can see how we had to evolve because the co management was not accepted.

Interviewer: So actually what we can say here is that the initial design as you said you were proposing co-management or privatization, but then because of all these challenges that you faced the one that you discussed then you had to propose other design, after like the sample transportation.

Respondent: Yeah, we had to add the cut some of the designs which were acceptable. And it was the feedback from the gentleman who joined later on, he replaced the former Division manager of RNL.

Interviewer: So they proposed the sample transportation, it was more acceptable. 

Respondent: It was more acceptable address our immediate concerns, like sample transport. Because someone used to say that if you brought me a private partner who can manage my sample transport system, so without me having to invest so much energy and staff in managing sample transport, I will sign that contract but give me all the things that are privatization I cannot sign such a contract. He was also in agreement that yes sample transport to be something really acceptable for someone who manages laboratory accreditation, because I think that is a massive gap there was only one love that quote accreditation in the rest of the models.

Interviewer: And what I was going to ask. And model that you proposed before the other designs. So what did they say about it. The other around co-management or privatization so they said okay let's start with this one it's more acceptable it's addressing one of the most urgent problem that we have sample transport.
But then, what next. You didn't discuss about it because in the short time that the choice was sample transport. And then in the medium term, or the long term, what was their vision?  Was it like, we don’t want to discuss about it anymore.

Respondent: So, the next we have looked at we had put a kind of statu quo, looking at things like the staff hiring and what all those who are managed by the public. Then we said, can you fully privatized a concession. They operate directly within the hospitals, the private law that they disagree. They said we cannot handle our laboratories to the private plan, it would need serious approval from the higher levels, I think this can do that by then, the co- management kind of caused issues. The public labs, they continue to operate with the private sector partner. That basically we recommended at highest volume labs where the private partner would maybe gain some level of income from volumes. So that co management came to where they would not understand. Okay. Our staff, and then patient and this data, managing that data, but who would be in charge of collecting the funds from the different sources, and how much would we end up paying, the private lab partner will be supporting? So those were things that took so long to negotiate. How much would they pay and what kind of payment mechanism in place, so it took so long.                                                                                                                                                  Seemed also been not because we limited them with few things like infrastructure staff, patient data. We left the rest of the things like capacity building, mentorship, procurement and supply chain. The things and also like the maintenance of equipment, we left them entirely to the private partner, okay those we talked to were either concerned about not being able to determine the staff hiring and conversation. Because if people are not meeting their targets, then it kind of affects their performance.  They need to have full control of staffing. And the thing is that also the private partner looked at lower staffing, because they would be able to motivate them better to hit the targets much better for them, even for the profit. But the government said no we cannot release our staff. Let go of staff. And then, where do they go.

Interviewer: So something else that we wanted to understand better along this process, you have this different actors that were involved in this process of designing the PPP, did the main actors changed along the process and how these changes affected the continuity of the process to the final discussion
Respondent:  So we had a steering committee. The steering committee had the Honorable minister. Think of it a DG we had some people from RNL, from the Ministry of health. But you would wake up tomorrow and the cabinet has changed someone, the Honorable minister is no more, or the DG has been relieved of his duties, or the lab director is no longer there. So, introducing the same concept to a new person, every single time, took us back a lot.                                   So that was the major problem, you would have a champion today. Then tomorrow you don't have a champion, they are no longer there at MOH, or they are no longer there in RNL, there is no longer someone who is part of the work.
So, introducing the work to different people every time, different stakeholders, you had to deal with. Today they are there tomorrow, they're not there.  You see someone from AM, the PM. Someone has gone, so you see a new one, you go and introduce the study. It takes a while for them to appreciate it, we had a scenario where some of the people who had just joined office, was practically ready of making a decision, but because they're just new in the office we had to get a lot of quorums every single time so that was one of the big challenges for us. But for us, we never changed, we always remained the same.

Interviewer: And like you said, but also maybe that's what we felt also from some of these interviews we've been able to do. Like some people who came after we're not briefed on the larger project,  AHDP. When you change the administration sometimes some of the activities that were implemented are stopped.
I want also to understand, Can you give us some names for example of the champions that you had.


Respondent:  We had the former division manager of RNL. We also had the current DG of Planning at MOH, we also had the former country director of CHAI and we had the current Minister of Health. And then we had to be introduced to him but before anything went to RDB, or the committee that said we needed to have a sign of by the honorable minister. And so the switch from then to that. Again, caused the problem then the DG was changed, and then we had another issue altogether. And then were there before we knew it, RBC was changed, and RNL was changed. I then took him to refer to the new clinical division manager. And so I think later on he was saying, Okay let's try to do something around sample transport. So, in the entire model.
I think we had introduced sample transport and I think you'll see it there is statu quo. We had the full co management, where the private labs would work then measure models we maintain, then a privatization. We had a sample transport co management and then we also thought would it be full outsourcing, would it be co shared. In all, I think we had the full co management, it was implemented. It had the less government subsidy. It had the lowest and the current state or something. But all the other PPP had government subsidy going up a bit, but the governments the insurance and out of pocket were, so really high. So we were setting a very hot cake. But, yeah, we were setting something that was again more expensive, but proposing and saying, okay, the insurance and out of pocket might be up and even the government subsidy might be up but over time, the government subsidy will get less low. And then we can have efficient services, improved the services, you know, realized in the better service offering more tests offered. So, that was one of the things. Yeah.

Question 6
Interviewer:  Okay. So, and then you know who have been responsible for approving the PPP designs in the process. You said the minister, right, is the one was going to be responsible for approving the PPP before anything.

Respondent: Yes. So the honorable minister would be the one to sign off the steering committee recommendations, before it goes up to RDB. And then from there, the RDB if they signed off at RDB that would launch a tender and start the negotiations, but I think we never crossed that, because we constantly remained at MOH. But I think later on we realized that there is another problem. We were dealing a lot with the MOH, and the people there and everything but also hoping that the NRL was backing us up but later on we realized they said no. We need to be the lead as a lab program, it has to be NRL owned. So we said but you have been part of this discussion all along, again you want it to be back to you before we proceed again. So, there was a kind of conflict a bit in terms of institutions.

Interviewer:  Interesting. And during this process of designing these models. So, you didn’t have maybe some other people that were taking you to a complete different direction.

Respondent: Copy that, we only had complete a different direction. Whenever we would have a change in leadership. So those are the things but also, I think it was mainly the change of leadership would have it at a different challenge. There will be like throwing different ideas entirely. Yeah.

Question 7
Interviewer: So, until you left. Because maybe you didn't know, after that so what were the option that people were considering. It was after with all the different models that you presented. So, towards the end, what was the model that was considered the most?

Respondent: So they were more comfortable with a sample transport co-management. So I think that was a little bit understandable. And it wasn't really bringing also changes to the lab network or asking someone to take off the entire, it was actually addressing the main challenge in terms of sample transport and sites. So that was probably the most acceptable we had discussions to we were more advanced. Yeah.

Interviewer: But it wasn't addressing all the problem, it was addressing, I think one of the main problem but what about the other problems. What was their plan to address them?

Respondent: So, I think what they said, we had a discussion late last year when we realized now we might not have enough. Yeah, we have done the laboratory diagnostic network optimization looking at the lab system recommending all kinds of changes, and this was alongside their pre-feasibility study. Facing the challenges and also on the DNO side we had instructed some changes that will improve the lab network, and a few other things and the recommendations were accepted on DNO. But when I think the new leadership at the NRL said they needed to implement changes in the lab network. So, for a period of time for example, one year, two years, then assess the improvements. And what areas, before taking on any PPP with that all models. So, okay, we realize we're coming at the end of the grant and people have gotten back to that as fast you turn our own assess the network, see what things we have improved, and then get back to you on which kinds of model. So we had discussions with the BMGF.
We had discussions with our global team, we had a discussion with the MOH and everything, and I think the voice was first lead us. And I think, the honorable minister gave to Former head of department of biomedical services with the attorney said, decide for your department decide what's best for you. And I think he decided you know what we need to fast instate our changes in the lab network moving devices from here to  there, you know  kind of been doing some changes in our lab network. They also had a model where they wanted to set up regional centers coordination centers that were going to be at the blood transfusion centers I mean the regional hospital and regions it was around four regions. And we were even supporting them to revise the national strategic plan and include all the targets at everything. And so they had a grasp of the rubber tree before even introducing any private party. So we kind of shoot ourselves in the foot.

Interviewer: I would like to better understand how disruptive, were the model that you were proposing to the stakeholders, when you compare to the system, the way the system was and how much change this model that you are proposing will require to the system to be able to work with it.

Respondent:  Okay, so one of the things that we set out to address. They were four things. Access, improve access, improving timeliness, improving the quality and the cost, reducing the cost of diagnostic network. So those are the things that we wanted to set out to transform. Okay, some a lot of coverage, good results, good quality, and at less cost. Then we did the prefeasibility assessment showed us clearly that, for example, the turnaround time was more than two months from sample collection to results delivery, the national policy, the service offering. I think they were around 100 plus tests but for 27 were being offered by the public labs. Imagine having 100 plus test but you can only offer of 20 something or thirty and health centers had 50% less than the test that were kind of made service package.
We had equipment that were nonfunctional, at the time of study. We had sites that were complaining of sample transportation issues and separate transport at the lower level has said that to the region to the district was managed was erratic, may be someone can use the bike and another use the public means, and then walks to the hospital, it was erratic, and then but from the district hospital to the testing hubs was being run by vehicles from which set of from NRL. You know, they would drive to sample pick up, then take to the hubs in the regions, and then move almost empty with no samples back to NRL to pack for a few samples for specialized testing.
So, all of those were challenges, but we also look at out of pocket by the patients. Imagine a patient goes to facility, the MOH service package shows this test is available but it's not available because it's not often they would have to pay two times because they're going to private facility to pay. They have already paid the insurance but they are also paying for a private facility because they are doing the tests outside the hospital.
So those were things that we had, but also in terms of accreditation that was our number one lab so that one spoke in terms of quality was on the one that said this one offers the best test is actually accredited  that was only in NRL the rest were left to God, you know. So all those challenges in terms of time, quality, or overall patient care. Were kind of, but we say that. Okay.
If you look at access to testing in the current state is terrible. Okay, the nonfunctional equipment in the current states terrible, stock out was very bad limited resources for those quite a management setup systems monitoring was bad, the only test that was being monitored was HIV testing the rapid HIV testing but also not every site. It was being handled by this gentleman, someone from NRL. So they had the point of management side. They are so high staff turnover in the public facilities, those were not addressed. Limited sample transport network coverage. It was ordinary the higher level in the public sector was that, but I think something that was a little bit addressed I think that time was a data management. There was some HMIS. There was some EMR, like some kind of also better load SMS, which was being handled by the hubs a delivery hubs and NRL, those were little bits kind of adding data management considering Rwanda is more digitalized country.
Yeah, then there was a clearly a disparity in a commodity pricing and the public sector. So, because facilities where they're reaching out to, they have their package of money they're reaching out directly to the warehouse and also their suppliers and buy directly to their pricing was so irregular because of their model.  And then they told you that at the National Insurance team there was a total lack of alignment in that current state, those were things that we saw across. And if you go to the sample transport co management. We would never really go to their model of sample transport management, would only fully address sample transport. We would have to manage a little bit of access for testing a bit. But remember, access to testing is not just about sample transport. It's also about staffing and other things, equipment were not found under this sample transport co- management. There was nothing around the stock outs, managing that even point management systems were never managed through the sample transport, staff turnover would never change. Even the pricing of equipment reagents and insurance can be addressed with this other co management model of sample transport. So, it was a model that was advanced and acceptable, but would never fully address the challenges that the system was facing.
So, we said OKAY can we do a full co management where you have the private player in the facility. So, that one was in terms of our vision would see a massive improvement in all those network challenges that we had identified access to testing instrument uptime stock outs resources for Quality management and monitoring the staff turnover. Those would be co-managed, but the co management remember the staffing was not the role of the private sector. It was the role of the government, the staffing and hiring. So, it would be a little bit addressed, but not fully addressed. It was a sticky point.
But a full co-management with the government and the private sector, running would then address other things like data management, sample transport  but still not fully address things like the National Insurance Scheme. It was kind of partially addressed. That one was never addressed really an older models to was partially addressed in the other two models. But under the privatization, you would address all these challenges because you would give targets to a private partner that we need this turnaround time we need this access to everyone. Because the private bear comes into make profits so they will be able to address many of this equipment updates on downtime. Logistics Management.  They would negotiate the best rate for the reagents. Okay, so bring improved transparency into commodity pricing reagents also manage data, sample transport all those things. So if you picked sample transport, and also addressed it with a co management of prioritization all those things, then would be able to address many of those challenges in the lab. So, I don't know whether I addressed your questions. 


Interviewer: Yeah definitely yes something that I didn't get well you said, when with co-management, there was still some area that were not addressed, for example, the staff but also you said health insurance. Can you elaborate more on the health insurance issue, the payment?

Respondent:  So the health insurance the red one was the rate was much lower than the market offering for reagents. And this would need further discussions to get the agreed upon. So, in all that we submitted and all the things. There was still going to be a challenge with National Insurance cases because we had really addressed the discussions for that in terms of pricing. I think there's a lady at MOH. I don't remember the name very well, she took on that discussion passionately, but it had never been resolved, and I think I left unresolved. To this day, I don't know. Tell me what is going on.

Interviewer: It's this is a hot cake like you are saying. So, you know, increasing the salary for the CBHI is been really difficult. At least, increasing to reflect the real cost.

Respondent: Exactly you know the tariffs, it was made way back, but things have changed their improvement this which have come up with, and the costs have gone up.

Interviewer: I totally understand that. So I think there was also some discussion about.  There is a costing study that was done recently also that came out with some results that are slightly higher than what the tariffs are the rates, the current rate. So, they are still in discussions to see how to integrates findings 

Respondent: In my own opinion I always thought His Excellence would help us with that such a problem.

Interviewer:  Yeah, the government can decide to add more subsidies, 

Respondent:  You know, the people listen to the President, a lot.

Interviewer: You know, you understand so much what was going on. So, what would you recommend? In the process, you know, because this process was quite.  I think challenging. What are your recommendations to increase the buy-in from all stakeholders, especially to stakeholders?

Respondent: I think it is made to allow the laboratory to take their efforts in improving the laboratory system. According to the DNO recommendations, assess the impact of their work in a year or so, then do a quick feasibility to see what the remaining gaps are. And with that, you can design a model that addresses the challenges that have not been addressed by their efforts. Because, I mean I have not travelled so widely but I can say that the government staff, the government of Rwanda, People really work hard and passionate about the work they're passionate about the way they work. So they work hard. I'm comparing with my Uganda where staff come and by 2pm they have disappeared.  So, if I'm to compare Yes, Rwanda had passionate about their work, but take on efforts that then assess what they need based on that, then they would accept okay we had that for two years. At this point, so we need help on this area. So, there are the big quick reassessment of the lab network, and then kind of tweak the recommendations based on their knit at the time. So then maybe it will be acceptable. But without them trying their best, they would feel people have just jumped in without helping. Yeah.


Interviewer:  Okay. And then from this experience that you got with AHDP in Rwanda, if you want to start to work on another  PPP project for example, on lab in a different country what would you change in, or what would you recommend or tips to improve the buy in of the stakeholders, all the key stakeholders?

Respondent:  So I think we need to understand faster, I would need to fully understand the landscape of the laboratory. I would still do a proper feasibility study of the lab. So kind of study but also the last thing I would widen the net in terms of stakeholders, not limited to a few nuclear change, if you have to introduce to others, but have everyone on the table, not just a steering committee but how people constantly engaged to show them the benefit of the PPP or not activity, and then also the other bit. I think I would have an earlier discussions with the private sector and the insurance companies, they couldn't be government owned or community based, but they could also be privately or understand, what can manage what cannot be managed. But also I think one of the things that would need to help a country would be start immediately from the get go, negotiating the real debt course and including things like bundling price per test.  And then, just the reagents, so that the manufacturer, as always, in the country agents of manufacturers are aligned with the country need in terms of cost, and the volumes that are available in the country. So, that is what I think I would do.

Question 11
Interviewer: We would like  there is a question here that was looking at the factors that changed the discussion around the PPP I think you raised some interesting points around how much it was going to cost to the government. And to health insurance and also the discussion around some aspect that were not fully addressed for example, co-management.  And do you see other factors that may have changed the discussion may have led to that change in the discussion around the PPP.

Respondent: I don't know, that is a valid one but I think. We had a scenario whereby people are fully engaged we were discussing with them and then COVID-19 hit. Around March. And the discussion died because the entire ministry, just jumped on COVID-19. That's the time again and they added live with the conversation after a pandemic was another thing altogether. You know, we all went in lockdown. So I can say, that was one of the things the conversation died at one momentum so that is one factor. That also affected things like the cost higher. Why it is higher why is the cup subsidy going higher. People are not willing to pay more money. Out of pocket money, CBHI is not going to put more money in these. So that is one of the things. Yeah.

Interviewer:  The other question we had some of these questions. You have already said something about those. I don't know if this is acceptable to Rwanda because the discussion didn't go that far. 

Question 12
Interviewer: So, because AHDP was not only providing technical support, but it was also providing also financial support for these PPP.  We would like to know how the availability of this support affected the PPP design, because knowing that you could get like some funding from an external source. You think that these affected the PPP design.

Respondent:  Because the entire PPP deals live on someone being able to get the loan facility. We never felt like the lab way to get the whole sell loan to build the infrastructure according to the standard. The other loan they got was for setting up the NRL, the new facility under the European Investment Bank. But it was entirely outside the AHDP so it could have affected I don't know really, because they got what they wanted. In terms of getting loan to run the system and then paid slowly we never felt people wanted to hear anything like getting loan. They wanted to see something around can a private partner bringing down their own money, and run their thing and then get out when we don't want them anymore. So, the loan thing was a sticking point.

Interviewer:  Yeah, actually it was. Instead of encouraging people to work on these PPP, it actually had an adverse impact people feeling that if the country has to take a loan, no this is a big No.

Respondent: Yeah, so that's one of the things, loans, approved really high up there may be at the highest level so it can kind of came up to the sticky point.

Question 13
Interviewer: So, are you someone who is kind of from outside the system of Rwanda and then you had to learn about that so how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for PPP Rwanda. What do you think?

Respondent: So I find the regulatory environment quite bureaucratic. It's so devoid of people who make decisions. It is only made of people who relay the information higher up for someone else to make a decision, people steered clear with the hard of decision.

Interviewer:  So it encourage people to not take those decisions. 

Respondent: Yeah, people were a little bit fearful of making decisions. The only thing that I think once I find is that, Rwanda has the rules that are basically avoid any form of corruption and is good. And so it being watertight, and with all those steps is a good thing.  And it's good to see a country that follows the guidelines to the letter and does not kind of bypass procurement steps. For example in Uganda, someone who come talk to the honorable minister, the contract to be signed tomorrow. In Rwanda that will not happen. So, me being an upside fast admired, I admired that people are following to the letter. For example, for Abbott deal I think it was signed in 2016 to do a feasibility, and I don't know that they have signed the full thing to this day. 

Interviewer: No, according to my information up to the end of last year. They did not. But, I don't know.

Respondent:  So that's one of the things that the steps are very rigorous, but I think they're supposed to be corruption proof. And so the thing is they are really bureaucratic so you have got to be. I think BMGF needed to give it time, the timelines they were giving for the very controlled environment. Without any bureaucracy or something, or quickly get someone, pick a contract. Okay, let's go for tender how fast know the speed at which you are giving it will not be taken on by every government, equally. You know other government have their processes and I think we need to respect the government processes, and the timings.  So, be flexible to hear things like let's first do our own effort then do another feasibility.  So, I think, the BMGF needed to hear that, but with a strict timelines that was a controlled environment that would not work, I don't know either Kenya managed to do it really or Ghana, with Ethiopia fully.

Interviewer: I remember that Ethiopia it was going slow.

Respondent: Yeah, so, like BMGF and EIB pushing us get the thing on. We need to get the loan. So it was kind of got us in a sticky point, because we were pushing too hard, and government entities when you push too hard it looks a little bit tricky.

Interviewer:  Yes, especially when it goes through government maybe you need to give them sometimes to digest all the information and take the decisions slowly.
So you had really tight deadlines with BMGF?

Respondent: We had hard time deadlines with BMGF, we were having sleepless nights. But the sleepless nights were not because of the government, they were because of them.

Interviewer: Well, and then you. Okay, if we go back to the system that how it is so we're talking about the policy the legal and regulatory framework. For you, you feel like they're supportive of a public private partnership except the fact that they are very bureaucratic but you feel like all the stones are there to allow PPP?

Respondent:  I think Rwanda has exemplified that they're open to PPP. They have several, I think on orthopedics or something. I think eye care or something. But the sticky point is, Get a loan. I think stood out really hard for them, we're open to someone working with us and partnering with us and we signed a contract and all of that. But we're going to be take a loan in immediately without understanding why are we getting loan for

Interviewer: Yeah so very open when it's private partner coming in and injecting money.

Respondent: Injecting money and negotiating yes, and they're open to having a section of the healthcare, is a priority needs addressed by private partner. But compared to other countries Rwanda has been open to private partners, just that I think this one stood out really clearing with a loan issue and the pace at which we were pushing the government to get a side deal and get a loan.

Question 14
Interviewer: Did you hear about any other past experience of Rwanda, especially in terms of PPP lab diagnostic. When you were working here

Respondent: Not really heard of it, and I only knew that portable private players in the lab sector, like lancet but. In terms of any other issues or laboratory private sector, I really not heard of it. And now when I remember there was something that also Rwanda was open to. And we had a discussion with the Global Public Health Foundation (GPHF) headed by Professor and his company offers services for laboratory accreditation. And so, they thought if such a person came in and they sourced funding from CDC. In terms of a grant to support the government. It is basically picked from Uganda. What CDC did in Uganda was to get GPHF to support public laboratories towards accreditation, you know.  And so that kind of a private player coming in applying for CDC grant, so that was something we had discussions with them and were open to it but it still come back that even if we had, we got this people on getting a loan from EIB they've been used to getting  the funding from examples, PETFAR.  But PETFAR in Rwanda was not opened to such. They kind of work different.

Interviewer: Interesting I think you had time to maybe also to interact with private partners here in Rwanda. 


Question 19
Interviewer: How interested. Were these private partners in participating in the PPP? What were the main questions for example, what are their biggest incentives, would you think and what are the drawbacks for them.

Respondent:  So the biggest incentive to join was that there's money to be made. But I think the concerns were is there really volume. In terms of test for the people. So we exemplified volume, because more volume means more gains, but also, what are the payment modality by government, you know. So that was something that also stood out how we would get compensated when we offer these services. I think those were the drawbacks really.


Interviewer:  Do you think that's when you look at private partners in country. Do you feel that they have the capacity to participate and deliver in this PPP or maybe you we will have to rely on private partners coming from outside the country?

Respondent: I think in the country, they are those private partners were basically again still from outside mainly South Africa like lancet, you could see they have the capacity to do, but the real  country ones we're not really having capacity. They are mainly outside as would be inside too, many outsiders that are working inside. For the local ones there is no that big capacity yet.

Question 21
Interviewer:  So, is there anything else that you feel you would like to discuss about this PPP, we didn't touch on.

Respondent: I cannot get off my head right now. But I think the PPP model, there is need to continue this conversation because it would benefit the people me I so firsthand that would benefit the people.  No matter how much the government put in and pushes. They are just some skills that you can only pick from outside. For example, accreditation of laboratories things around the sample transport. You see blood transfusion has been drastically visualized in Rwanda, which is a big thing people see drones, because they were being managed by someone. So I think, should be a conversation that is handled and discussed by these people, and we see. I think it's worthwhile. So that why they should be starting the new discussion.

Interviewer:  What are your recommendations in the context?


Respondent:  I will think one. There is a need for BMGF or wherever is still interested in a private is in this AHDP to give it some more time. And in one, improve the capacity, the understanding of government. Of their services and also the priorities that lies within the private sector. So that would be a good need to educate the private sector, on what they can do to address the challenges that opportunities that are in the government to address these challenges so capacity building is one thing, knowledge sharing, open transparent technology and sharing, but also BMGF can facilitate that process to see that is actually increased the understanding of the role of the private sector within public institution. So that is something that needs a lot of time to try to be grounded and everything, and it should be I think now when they have not yet forgotten about it. And people should be able to do that so that is one good thing that I think is needed to be done.

Interviewer:  So, Thank you very much for this interview, actually, for me I learned a lot, about this process. You know you're not the first one I do the interview with but the people I discussed with were not very much aware of this process and then with you I think I learned a lot. 
And your inputs are going to be very helpful for this evaluation especially that we want to document the lessons learned from this implementation so that all the stakeholders, understand what went wrong. And actually what worked,
So, and I think from this process. People will learn a lot, and then will be implementing the recommendation for the subsequent PPP we never know. Maybe next year or two years as you said, and I remember because I did discuss with some people at RBC and then you said something that they said too that they wanted to implement, Where  the strategies the activity that they had planned already for the DNO.  And later on, maybe after two years, maybe move to the PPP so it still just something that they are thinking about. But for now, they want to implement, and what they have in their plans.



Respondent: So the other thing I think which fell out of my mind a recommendation would be the NGOs that are working with either BMGF or nothing to support that should have some form of support, dedicated support for people who sit at the ministry on a day to day sitting at their ministry. People who were embedded into the system. So, that would be, kind of bring more trust to the process, and also interact with every day. I think that's very important when you have people embedded in this team, while working within a daily on many other tests. You could decide to remember it. A government official works at the Ministry who is like a champion or something, but I think that gives more liberal.

Interviewer:  Just want to comment on that one. But you were working with some people at the ministry.

Respondent: Yeah, so two things really matter a lot motivating people financially to get work done. Because, I mean, you could hire them or make them seconded to their ministry, but they should be embedded in the system to get more buy in.

Interviewer: So, you feel like maybe you need, like sometimes some of the partners do they hire someone who is going to be sitting at the ministry or NRL and working fully dedicated to the project.

Respondent: Yeah, I also felt like, imagine I was Ugandan, my colleagues were from America I mean, tell me the Rwandan component in that. So we wanted someone from national because we were never seated at the Ministry of Health even at NRL, we would just visit a few meetings, we never seated at RDB we were seated in our office, most of the time.

Interviewer:  But didn’t you work closely with someone there at Ministry of Health or at NRL, even though you were sitting outside.

Respondent:  We worked with them to look at dealing with Lhasa, who was many tasked and best, but if you hired people and seconded them to MOH and then seconded them to RDB and asked them to understand the internal challenges, you know, read the minds of the leaders, to see there will be champions, even if with a change of Minister or a DG, they actually show institutional picture, they are kind of enumerated by you but they are embedded in the system the locals, they are nationals, and they are  identified with everything.

Interviewer: So, we are coming to the end of our interview, I would like to thank you for the discussion, it's really a good I think for you it's going to be a good experience of how to deal with government counterparts you know all these things happen every day and I think they are going to continue to happen because, for example, changes are still coming. 

Respondent: So, and I want to come back to Rwanda and see how the DNO and I was very passionate about the DNO recommendations. I would like to come back and see how further progressed and meet the former head of department of biomedical services.

Interviewer: Yeah, but he changed his position too. So you know, and that's why we need some way of improving how we implement things and some continuity.

Respondent: He hasn’t even implemented his design, and now he is gone. I can say that I have never seen a country that has so many changes in short time. I dealt with some stakeholders it is understandable, it is also a method. That's why probably you are the least corrupt in your region. So, it's a nonsense kind of thing, I think, I don't know.

 Interviewer:  It was a pleasure to really discuss with you. And once we have our findings together. I think we will be able to share them with you. That to see what's came out of this evaluation and because Rwanda is not going to go on with the PPP now I think the evaluation is going to continue with the other countries. Yeah.
































