Question 1
Interviewer:  So, I will start with the first question asking you to describe your involvement in the public private partnership process, and the African has the diagnostic platform in Rwanda.

Respondent:  Thank you Dr. so, my involvement in the PPP project. Firstly, from the sector level, Ministry of health with the partners in this because we have been dealing with public private partnership projects, as usual in other sectors, and in this most diagnostic in better improving quality of service in the laboratory. We thought of also having a public private partnership for improved care. So my involvement in the project lead, has been coordinating the teams of this project that is from the Ministry of health, their partners and RBC and also RDB, so I've been coordinating to this work, day and, right, The feasibility study showed us, as in areas of improvement in the quality of service delivered by our laboratories currently. And why do we need a PPP model. So my role has been the coordination role from the Ministry level.

Interviewer: Thank you, I saw that you have been well involved in AHDP at the highest level at the Ministry of Health. And also, you were in charge of coordinating these efforts. 
The second question for you is related to wether or not you are familiar with the African health diagnostic platform, which is currently being a discussed in Rwanda so I understood that you have been coordinating everything there so there is no reason to go through this question.


Question 3
Interviewer: So, my third question that will be about the PPP design exactly? So, what was the process of negotiation over this PPP?

Respondent: As I said, we first had a problem statement, why are we going for a PPP. There was an issue of improving our quality of care, the delivery of services in the laboratories in public hospitals, and in line with also the national reference lab. This happened some years back, realizing that there were some inefficiencies and issues to deliver the quality of care in testing and result delivery being good on time, so leaders thought of what they can do to improve and they decide to do a feasibility study with the support of obviously different partners and RDB because if you want to bring in public private partnership then you involve RDB. But that was before we had to talk to Minister we wanted to improve quickly, then they had to do the feasibility study, to see, I would call it like a situation analysis, what has been done and how can we improve what has been done you know for the quality of care to be achieved. So, the feasibility study showed different six issues that did the laboratory are facing in the hospitals.I cannot remember, most of them but I will tell you, one of them was in the delayed results delivery from where the samples were taken to from the patient, (sampling site). But the diagnosis that will be made after the results delivery are good. So, one of the six recommendations was let us improve the sample transportation to have the delivery of the results on time. Another one was also to improve the management how they did, so they could make some money and also the capacity of staff, you know, We had to sit back and say, okay, this has to be faced, we cannot take on over the six recommendations at the go? But where do we go first. And with that is most pressing for the country, maybe for the laboratories then we say,, let's first deal with sample transportation. And this would start with a piloting phase of a PPP, and then we see what this will produce. So the negotiation was around how it should be a first implementation of the recommendations from the feasibility study and phase one was sample transportation to be under that PPP. So, and that's where the negotiation started how do we start, do we start by piloting and then after six months implementing the sample transportation we would do transition to full co-management of this. The full PPP managing them, the whole laboratory services that was the plan actually after the results and assessment of the first PPP, that was the negotiation and that's where we are. 

Interviewer: That PPP was the partial PPP.

Respondent: Yes, yes. Sample transportation only

Interviewer:  The sample transportation would start first ? what was recommended next? 

Respondent: Second would be a full, co-management, like lab co-management, like the private person who would take on some staff hiring/firing, new equipment supply chain all of that would be transitioned to the private partner. Even though it would be transitioned to full co-management still MOH, RBC would have the oversight and coordination, but actually the partner will be taking all of that.

Interviewer: Oh, Thank you very much for this response.

Respondent:  Thank you.

Interviewer: How did this process vary by topic? If I can say so for example facility selection the procurement model contract type, including the referral network.

Respondent: I will say let start by the facility selection of what we had, like how the project look like let me focus on the first phase which I talked about the partial, how these are organized we had to sample out facilities, I will explain this when I will address the question of how the facilities were selected. First of all, we looked at the facilities in different hospitals, and their health centers in different provinces of the country according to geographical distribution. And why did we select, what made us choose those hospitals, we looked at. First of all, the volume, what are the volume of samples that we get from these hospitals? Secondly, what is the catchment area? If there is no nearby laboratory that were were struggling to have the specialty laboratories lab tests not done. 
I talked about the geographical distribution because we never wanted to implement sample transportation with the low volume of samples to transport per day. So we needed also the large volumes of those hospitals so that was the main criteria of selection of these hospitals, and they had to be six. So like sites in the different provinces; Kigali, we had one, we had Ruhengeri in the north, we had Gihundwe, we had Gisenyi in the west, we had Nyagatare in east, and Rwamagana in the east, so they were Kibagabaga in Kigali. The selection went to RBC to own data to see what are those hospitals that are having large volumes of samples? That was the main criteria of selection, geographical distribution and also representativeness because we wanted to see urban versus rural and another key factor was  we looked at how those hospitals were having the volume of lab test in the last six months earlier, so that is what we considered.

Interviewer: Okay six hospitals from different provinces. Yes. Well, except the Kibagabaga I see those other hospitals with these satellite labs. 

Respondent: Yes, actually. The criteria why we selected them, they had satellite labs, because the way the project was designed was, we could have these satellites labs, be like, call them what sampling sites, I think like where the hubs is. The lab samples were brought at the satellite sites (hubs), and they were collected at the hubs, then they are tested and results are given back, and those samples that wouldn't be tested at those satellite labs, then they're transported to the national lab. But those selected were like those used as the hubs in those provinces. Criteria number two, the catchment area I talked about is attached to every hospital, we considered these catchment areas with its surrounding health centers within each hospital, I think they were around 59 centers, and six hospitals, I don't remember numbers well, because I don't have the numbers here sorry for that but the hospitals must have the catchment area that’s how health center was also considered.

Interviewer:  So, the sample were transported from the health centers also?

Respondent: Yes, then they are brought to the hospital that one which has a satellite lab which make it called a hub.


Question 4
Interviewer: That's very good. Oh okay, what were the sticking points around the PPP design, and how were well they resolved.

Respondent: What I saw along the areas of negotiation, the providers from RBC side. What we were looking at would be, how the PPP would look like in sample transportation, and this is a private person coming in the laboratory. And how would the lab be separable from the hospital. There were those worries, how are we bringing in this private person operating in the public hospital. And how the quality and the management would be assured in this. But this was discussed on and according the design, this was settled for the M&E. Team framework were prepared to tackle and it was central coordinated transportation trucking, and also that trucking of delivery of samples and return of the result so this worry was discussed and was cleared. That’s was worry number one and worry number two was the expensive means of bringing in the PPP, the private person who will bring in increased costs on the test and there yet we have the MUTUELLE health insurance which will not cover the increase of cost in these tests, but we thought that this is going to be considered after the PPP model is agreed on. Then it will be a discussion with the RSSB to see how do we caterer. However, these were considered to be minimal like increment this small in the transportation cost for the samples, but it was needed to show what is the profit or the return  of investment to the government of Rwanda is going to get from having a PPP instead of like working as a status core as it has been working. We thought why the government can’t invest in improving the quality of laboratory services themselves as they know better the problem so then we change our status core instead of bringing in private person. Then we discussed about the financial analysis and caches looking at the gains that the PPP model will bring up the growth that will be shared between the private and the government of Rwanda after PPP timeline. We realized that it would take us a long time and much more investment to change the status core. 
There's a lot that has been done, the PPP model, the feasibility study has been done. The cash was a weaknesses but however there's much to do, given the COVID. We were challenged, it was during COVID, and there were much investment that will put in laboratories that have changed somehow the status core, whereby like there are these initiatives that are already in implementation like laboratories improvements in terms of delivery in terms of more equipment testing for specialty laboratory, sort of lab tests. And with the AHDP PPP proposals that were brought on since the COVID come in we decided we first assess the impact of what has been put in place what has improved or not, and then may be after one year we can then see whether we proceed with PPP or not.

Interviewer: For the investment done in the lab, especially were caused by COVID-19. So, what was the key point, was it like to see what will happen with this investment?

Respondent: Yes, because you talked about the peripheral laboratories which make the satellite laboratories, RBC only one reference lab, national reference lab but now we look at the improved transportation because we have the peripheral laboratories, the satellites whereby it will not now need someone from Gisenyi saying to bring their samples to Kigali.
So, with this transportation, we want to see what has been the change in the efficiency and delivery of results on time, and other initiatives. Because, were at phase one, we were looking at how we can speed up the transportation among other initiatives. And see if  we need a PPP model to improve further, then we shall discuss that, after the assessment.


Question 5
Interviewer: Thank you very much. That’s was very informative. So, who has been involved in the initial design of the PPP?

Respondent:  Oh great, so I will tell you the stakeholders in this: we had the minister of health taking the lead and coordination. We had RBC like implementing, who will be actually like the backbone of this for PPP project because they take care of laboratory services. We had CHAI, they were like development partner who was like, giving us technical support and who led the feasibility study with the consultants.
We had also RDB; for a PPP negotiation, you have to involve RDB as this is our core stakeholder in the design of this project.

Interviewer: What about MINECOFIN,

Respondent:  MINECOFIN was not yet involved.

Interviewer: What about the health insurance.

Respondent: They were not yet involved.  This was early discussion but this; if we could agree that this is the model, we would go to them because they will pay for this. The health insurances to pay for their patients, their clients,  MINECOFIN in terms of budget  if the PPP is approved at a technical level.
You know how it is, we submit to RDB. And then from RDB there is steering committee for PPP, which includes MINECOFIN, Ministry of health and other stakeholders. So that level we hadn’t been reached.


Interviewer: Okay! You said that the CHAI was helping in the technical aspect, especially for feasibility study.  But also, the CHAI was as the Ministry of health development partner. On the other hand, biding for these PPP. So, having this kind of financial aspect. What do you think about that?  Can you elaborate a little bit of this aspect of market? 

Respondent: Right. CHAI was the one Bill and Melinda Gates used to pass the money through from the aspect of Finance. But they were also giving the technical support. This is a dual role of CHAI. They were like really supportive and like they were giving guidance during the technical discussions and was supportive. So, they facilitated, I looked at them now and, actually, they were facilitator, irrespective that they had that financial aspect.

Interviewer: Yeah. Thank you very much so.
So, did the initial design change during the deliberation? as I know you came to stop it. How did the initial design change during the deliberations?
How were the actors involved in the design process, change between the initial design? And the final agreement which did not come in. So, can you elaborate on that? 

Respondent: Thank you. So, I would say it like this. As I told you there were six recommendations from the feasibility study on how to improve the quality of laboratory services. These six recommendations were grouped in two phases, as per our guidance, the MOH choose to have a phased implementation or plan of the result of the recommendation.
The phase one alone was to look at how to improve sample transportation for timely results and timely diagnosis. And then phase two, after this sample transportation, like partial or management of the lab by private and the public hospital still own their lab network. Five recommendations were to be addressed in phase two model, whereby we are transitioning to have full co-management. For the private sector every part of the management of the lab and MOH/RBC oversight and supervision. So, it never changed as much, that's what we continued to discuss alongside. 
What changed as their continued discussions by the cause the actors in the PPP, in the project, is that we have at RBC and MOH already some initiatives in place.
Let's first evaluate these initiatives, then the PPP. We did the feasibility study in 2018-19, I think the report came out in 2019.  Much have been done and there is something that was not evaluated after all this investment done in our laboratories. Unless one year actually was considered as change, but the whole project was kept the way it was designed.

Interviewer: If I understand well, the cutoff point was investment done during the COVID-19 

Respondent: Yes. There was a lot that was done to improve the testing capacity to improve the transportation, and so on and so on.

Interviewer: So, have there been any Champions, supporting the PPP? Who has been championing the PPP in Rwanda?

Respondent:  To me the champion I think is RDB, Rwanda Development Board. These are people who give guidance, these are people who actually even if there is a steering committee, the PPP will go there. They are like our support transport, hey are the champions.

Interviewer: I do understand the RDB is championing all PPP because it’s their mandate. But, regarding PPP in laboratories, who is the champion who brought the idea to the table to be discussed, did this come from RBC?  

Respondent: Yeah, they proposed this, and then we started engaging for the policy level to involve everyone. They call for an innovative way, or PPP or another way of addressing these issues came from RBC.

Interviewer: Have there been any other actors, trying to propose the opposite direction from the main actors working in the PPP.

Respondent: Actually, during the course of all these negotiations, some discussions came in to improve our public laboratories without involving PPP because we are worried how to separate the hospitals from the laboratory because there was a worry.
Technicians worried about PPP model. It feels like now laboratory is something separate from the hospital.
So, there was some worry of that but this wasn't very big to make opposing force. Actually, it was to address their worries and say this is how PPP has operated in other countries. We had two different case studies (Kenya and India). These Case studies were supportive to show to these technicians who had these worries that we are separating the labs from the hospitals.  We saw that this has worked somewhere else and it has improved services. 


Interviewer: And in India and Kenya again, I think there were good results.

Respondent:  Yeah, I think what this means is to learn how they improved, we come to learn about this.

Interviewer: These ideas to not separate lab from hospitals were they coming from the implementers such as the hospitals, or policy makers?

Respondent: It was from RBC side again, they were worried. But the hospitals, we had not yet engaged to them because you can never engage them when you are at the policy level and you have not yet agreed on this model.

Interviewer: Okay! That’s very good.

Question 6
Interviewer: So, which institution would have been ultimately responsible for approving the PPP design?

Respondent: It's the steering committee. All PPPs go through the steering committee at the country level composed by RDB, MOH and MINECOFIN. All PPP initiatives are approved by the steering committee.

Interviewer: RDB, MOH, MINECOFIN

Respondent: With some people from the International, I don't know, but I will check, but you know 

Interviewer: I think there is MINEFRA also

Respondent: But not at institutional level.

Question 7
Interviewer: What options were there? Or, are still being considered on designing the model?

Respondent: I think I've been repeating these options. What we wanted was like you operate, and after five years you transfer back laboratory to the government to the public ownership. I'm not familiar with these terms, but this kind of management in the hands of the private partner for five years, and then after five years you transfer back the facility the laboratories to the government of Rwanda. I don't know how they call it, but I've been seeing those terms. That's what's the option proposed.

Interviewer:  So, the contracting options are like so.

Respondent:  yeah, sure.

Interviewer: If I understood well  the private would have everything to manage

Respondent:  Yes,

Interviewer:  And the government would oversee and then they transfer everything over five years.

Respondent: Yes. That’s how the project was built.

Question 8
Interviewer:  And how appropriate is the design of African health diagnostic platform the PPP to the local context,

Respondent: Sort of complicated but not so complicated. To me, the appropriateness comes with what the country or the local context want. And this is what Rwanda’s case was, it was a good way that we already had wanted, and we proposed this. That’s why we went for a feasibility study. I think for the Africa diagnostic health platform, its mandate or its work with the local context on the PPP was welcomed and was fitting in our need. 

Interviewer: So, at the levels of policy legal framework. There was one? Was it fitting all these levels?

Respondent: You know, in Rwanda we have the PPP guideline. So, that is already a legal aspect of that. I think the context welcomes the PPP model.


Question 9
Interviewer: So how would an ideal PPP design accommodate the needs of a priority population such as broadest household? There are complicated patients for example the comorbidities, the chronic conditions, how the ideal PPP design addresses the special need of MUTUELLE about the poorest households, the 25% of households whose MUTUELLE is paid by Government.

Respondent:  I will start with the poor. Like you rightly mentioned, these people are covered by MUTUELLE, CBHI, and in the PPP the tests (out the specialty test) were supposed to be taken care of. They are already covered, and only the copayment would come for the categorization number three. The vulnerable with the poorest are covered by the government of Rwanda subsidiaries, and they are covered. Meaning that even the PPP will accommodate the existing structure. 
When you come those living with chronic diseases, the same applies. And this was more and more advantageous because we wanted to bring the most specialized tests nearby to these peripheral laboratories, we call them satellite laboratories and in the PPP model we call them the distinct hubs. So, you'll find that this model was addressing the needs of this population. 

Interviewer: That's very good. So, would the PPP design address a key consideration to improve access of laboratory diagnostic? If PPP is proposed?

Respondent: Access was number one key recommendations. So, as we opted for sample transportation, in that phase one we are addressing access, because we wanted timely access of laboratory sampling and testing, and this was already addressed in the PPP model, 

Question 10
Interviewer: Any elaboration on availability of test, the quality and efficiency also affordability in a PPP model?

Respondent:  As I told you, co-ownership was to improve on supply procurement and supply for affordability. This has to be the cost to be covered by the insurance, as the same has been in negotiation with insurance of CBHI. I think I've addressed for affordability and availability, what are the other two?

Interviewer: It was the quality and efficiency.


Respondent: For efficiency and the quality, I mentioned about setting controls on how the samples are taken and delivered. Not to lose samples on the way. So, this was also addressed in the monitoring platform that was proposed. That was to be centrally monitored by RBC, MOH, and the Partner was to address quality and efficiency. Actually, we needed timely and cost-effective model that would be changing the status core, if we have seen that there are inefficiencies. We wanted to eliminate the inefficiencies and this was also the design that was considered.

Interviewer:  So. Which consideration is best served by the current design and why? 

Respondent: I don't think we have already a model, because we have not started it. So, I'm confused. I think we don't have it yet; we have a proposal.

Interviewer: So, now we move for the next question. The question is what were the factors that you think changed the discussion around the PPP that I think it was covered.

Question 12
Interviewer: If Africa health diagnostic platform is providing the technical support. and the facilitating financing for this PPP. How would the availability of this support affect the PPP design? 


Respondent:  They are dual, it is like you are supporting and then you are on the finance side. To me, that would be a conflict of interest. But actually, we expect professionalism in this because we are looking at you want to have quality of diagnostic services in Africa, in the selected countries. So, what I look at as living finance control, nothing can happen without finances, but also the platform should support, technically, and advise. Technically, because we are independent, we are looking at what is worth, that would work best for us.. The effect should be positive, not the other way around to push us to do. I see people declaring no conflict of interest but I don't know how it would work in this situation.

Interviewer: Maybe you would understand this in this way AHDP come without any conflict of interest, because it's just facilitated the AHDP do not look AHDP as CHAI. Just. These are the Melinda gates. There are European Investment Bank, and they are bringing in money, and also providing some technical support for. They are not, beading they are facilitating, CHAI.

Interviewer: So, the question is now how the availability of the support affect the PPP so, PPP would have an added value, and which one.

Respondent: Actually, I think if that is very straightforward if it is this case. There is no support on this PPP from the side of AHDP.  So, their support would mean a success of the PPP. I think it would be more valuable to have AHDP supporting the PPP to come into existence, because I think that their facilitation is very positive for the PPP to exist. 

Interviewer:  So, what are the features of the PPP design that would not be possible without AHDP technical support?

Respondent: I look at evaluation, because we need these evaluations at the point of implementation. So, this would be hard. If we don't have an evaluator. And I think this would be affected if I could not have the platform supporting the PPP. And also, technical support and facilitation along the process of the PPP which is key because we have experts.  

Interviewer: So, what are the features of the PPP design that would not. How would you recommend African health diagnostic platforms, technical support being used to address any gaps?
Or weaknesses in a capacity. Among the key stakeholders. 

Respondent: Thank you. Firstly, as I mentioned earlier, on the last statement I have mentioned, technical support you know the stakeholders in this project need to be for capacity to take on, and to lead the PPP discussions, and also the design. So, I'm looking at the AHDP starting in the starting phase of guidance and support discussions. And also, because you cannot come into the evaluation when you have not really supported the project. I understand you can't design and then evaluate, but also just to be sort of some technical support that is needed along the project to design and develop, and which improved the capacity of some the stakeholders in the project. So, that's my view on how I look at that technical support.

Question 13
Interviewer: Now we move from the following set of discussion questions about the context of the PPP design. The next question would be how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for the PPP.

Respondent: I'm not clear on that maybe if you can simplify it.

Interviewer: So, considering the existing policies and regulations, and existing framework. How are they supportive to the PPP design?

Respondent:  Oh, they have very much support to PPP as actually they allow a private investment in health. In terms of domestic resource mobilization for health, there were discussions on the initiatives on the African Leadership meeting on domestic resource mobilization. So, I look at PPP as one way of investing, increasing private investment in the house in country. And if you look at the policy and regulation, I mentioned it earlier on, there is also an existing PPP guideline to allow   private public partnership models coming into the health sector. 

Interviewer:  So how much resistance among the policy makers will this PPP need to overcome?

Respondent: Most of the policymakers would like to maintain the quality. If we give the private to deliver the services we have been delivering, this private partner should be in position to convince or to show a model that considers quality ahead of other things. Otherwise, it's a management modality that has to be negotiated and I don't think there is much resistance on that. So, the concern would be, how do we maintain quality or how to improve quality with the private person in the laboratory services. 

Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, how flexible is the PPP to change according to changes in the government, or government priorities.

Respondent: One thing is that there are priorities in government that have to be achieved in different ways. Also PPP is one of the ways like if we need to improve quality, if we need improve efficiency. So, in the lab this is one priority we have. You will find that there are existing policies and guidelines on that. I think this would be also a fitting way to address the priority of the country.

Question 14
Interviewer: Yeah. So, what are other recent or earlier experience or a project to have there been in a country that you can provide the lessons for African health diagnostic platform. And that PPP that does exist in Rwanda.

Respondent: I don't think there are many things that I might know. But I can tell you about ABBOTT.  ABBOTT laboratory has been one of the PPP models that has been working. May be African health diagnostic platform can learn or we can learn from that PPP design and implementation. 

Interviewer: Were you involved in this?

Respondent: Not really. I wasn't involved but I read, I read partly not deeply reports about the implementation. Yeah, so, but I never involved in that.

Interviewer: So, how trusting collaborative, is the relationship between public and the private sector for the health.

Respondent: I think that should be trust should be good, because this is where we are going to, because we are increasing, we are attracting more private investors to invest in health. And you can't attract someone you don't have trust, but as there should be a control mechanism that the public should put in place to know if, actually, what has been agreed on is what has been what is being implemented the ground so that the population is protected. I think that's all I can respond to that.

Question 15
Interviewer: Well, thank you very much so. So, what has been the historic investment and interest from the government in the laboratory diagnostic? And what is profile of health workers, relative to the diagnostic system, including training, cadres

Respondent: Yeah. Thank you so. Actually, I would say that the investment is heavy from planning and budgeting process. For the laboratories, they are planning to purchase and procure equipment and we consider training of laboratory technicians who will be trained and deployed. Also, we consider supply of consumables used in the lab. I think that is heavy investment from the side of government.

Question 16
Interviewer: That's very good. Yeah. So, who are the key stakeholders in the PPP and why are they involved?

Respondent: At policy level, MOH is very key because every day PPP has to be addressing the priority of the country. RBC, has to be there as implementers. And we also have health providers, these are the hospitals and they are very key. I will not forget the ministry of finance and economic planning.  And also, the RDB is a key stakeholder for PPP. We also see our partners in health financing so these are very key stakeholders in the PPP model design discussions and also implementation.

Interviewer: How do they perceive, the advantage and disadvantage of the PPP.

Respondent: The advantage number one is to address the identified gaps in the laboratory. The disadvantage as I mentioned before is quality.
We don't want PPP; we only want our laboratories to be supported and then they can deliver the required services.
Interviewer: So, people do not want the PPP.


Respondent: Not all of them want it, but some have that ambiguity. The wonder if it will work well. For everything that is new, people will have to ask why we go for that. But they have to convince this with existence of this project elsewhere. And what were the results. And then I told you that this is tied to individuals. 

Interviewer: Yeah, and what are the advantages?

Respondent: Addressing the gap of inefficiency, timeliness, and also improve the supply chain of the consumables and functionality of equipment and technologies.

Interviewer: That's good. So, what are the incentive to participate in the PPP? What would attract the private sector to invest in lab of the people?

Respondent: On the incentives for private investors in Rwanda, we have many of them. And among them. First of all, if you want to invest that should be favorable for you financially, the banks are already there without the corporate income tax. There's a lot from the RDB sides, that most investors interested in, but from the health sector, there is already an incentive of available workforce. And they will be working in your company PPP project, and they are skilled., then the clients. That is need and I think all the investors would be interested to invest where there is demand.  To realize the return on investment, those are the incentives for an investor, but there are other detailed investments incentives from RDB side

Interviewer: So, how threatening to the success of the PPP is the potential for turnover in key position among National actors.

Respondent: I don't think this is a threatening point because these projects are not individualized. If there is a change in a position, it doesn’t mean that everything is changed, and there is transfer of skills and knowledge, and also hand overs that are given to the changes in position. To me, I don't think this is a threatening.


Interviewer: Yeah, I do understand, but today I may be discussing with someone, who understand things and tomorrow, I discuss it with the recent who may not understand.

Respondent: I do agree

Interviewer:  And this is the reason of changing also the people, because the people are being changed for improvement like that. So, what do you say as that? As the health financing and the planning, Policy.

Respondent: It's valid the concern. To have threats that will be sluggish, all like lagging back because of lack of information for the new person. The project will be moving, if someone changes, not every team, because the team is built, still the actors will be in position to onboard the new leader or the new position person that has come in, so that it doesn't hamper their progress of the project, and the working relationship of AHDP on the PPP.


Question 17
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, whose interest, helped or hurt by the laboratory diagnostic happening in the public versus private sector.

Respondent: It is the population because we are delivering service to the population, also the government would be because its priority is to deliver quality service. That’s managed by the public or by the private but regardless of who provides these services, there will always be our population that is served.

Interviewer: The population is hurt, or is benefiting in the public, or in private.

Respondent: Benefit both ways. You want me to choose one depending on design? 

Interviewer: It's not a matter of choosing, it's matter of delivering your perspective to some which way. The population will be benefiting with the public instead of private.

Respondent: My perspective, I'll tell you that I don't want to be decided because if we look for PPP, we are looking for a solution to address the issue. So, I will not choose between the two. My opinion would be if we can improve it publicly without involving the private person, then we should do that. And then the beneficiary will be served. If we cannot do this, and we need more investment from the private investment that is OK, and then this investor should come in, to work to the standard on the quality of service that the government would want so that our population is well served. That's my opinion though it’s not exciting, but it's just looking at what are the end results that we want to achieve.

Interviewer: Who benefits, the most from a joint to public or private venture in the laboratory diagnostic.

Respondent: I think it's a win-win situation, because the government wants to improve the care and you as an investor you bringing in money to get return on investment. So, we should have a win -win situation. What have I invested and what have I gained and for the government, what have I achieved versus me not bringing this investor in this area?  It must be a win-win situation.

Question 18
Interviewer: So, how the structure of the African, health diagnostic platform project itself affect dynamics at the country level.

Respondent: I think it not affects but it aligns with dynamics of the county level. Because it's coming into the area of PPP, and we already have it so I don't see any effect on that. And it has to align to existing government guidelines instructions. 

Question 19
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So how interested are private partners in participating in the PPP? Do you have some kind of historic background?

Respondent: I know but for the particular project we didn't go further, I think they would be interested because already have ABBOTT, we have other private partners like Lancet, you know.  I think there will be in the same interest, but we didn't reach that stage.

Interviewer: So, we are moving towards the end. 

Question 20
Interviewer:  But the following the one is only for your plan, because we wanted to talk about the sustainability. What are or could be the plans in place to support the public sector financing in the diagnostics in the future?

Respondent: The plans to me, I will go back to what I mentioned earlier. All along in the National Planning and Priorities setting and selections. In order to have improved access to quality of care, Testing is vital. Testing and diagnostics for the health care provision are vital. And this has been always considered in planning phases from the Ministry of health and taking care of all these other needed equipment, infrastructure for the laboratories, and this have to be actually financed by either the government or external refunding through resource mobilization. As this is annually or each and every year’s process, it’s sustainable. And because we have to tell to a funder to take care of our diagnostic services in country, as I mentioned, they might be from the government ordinary budget, but many from external funding through resource mobilization. So, the same would be for the PPP. If you have the plans, then they would be considered in the national plans.

Interviewer: Yeah, so, which different sources of funding are expected to be used for financing the diagnostic?

Respondent:  I mentioned them government and external funding.

Interviewer: At which proportion? Because it's 80% external.

Respondent: Not really, it may not be that because if sustainability will be there., Government puts much of the percentage. I would say actually the inverse, government around 80%, and external 20%, even maybe 10%, because you cannot ensure sustainability when you rely on external funding


Interviewer: So, a very specific one. If you have information, but you have a planner. So, how does the government include the financing support to the diagnostic and during the PPP period?

Respondent: It is straight but we don't have this already. So, I cannot respond to this.


Interviewer: Okay, how the budget to finance lab diagnostics has been increasing in the government.

Respondent: Oh, for specifically this we're talking about? 

Interviewer: Yes.

Respondent: Oh, I don’t think so.  I wouldn't be talking of what has happened for with this specific project, but here we are not having it, we just stopped it, and we dumped it.

Interviewer: How the government has been increasing the budget for diagnostic

Respondent: That’s what’s I said, that is three years now, on every year we look at the needs and there must be increase on what was needed on the previous year. I think maybe like 20% increase. That's a across the whole priorities that have been budgeted.


Question 21
Interviewer: Is there anything else you would like to discuss about the PPP that we have not yet talked about.

Respondent:   I think what we didn't talk about is only about the feasibility study. When should it be done? One of the challenges we faced was that time lag between when we want to implement and when was this study done, and we looked at the data and the data were not updated. So, recommendation would be doing timely feasibility studies. Was like talking about these we were looking at the data of 2019? And that was one of the big challenges because when you want to implement PPP, it is very crucial as much has been covered 


Interviewer: Thank you very much for your time. I don't know when you open the door for PPP or AHDP. You said that you will come in again as we discussed, and I will be happy to come back to you. If you accept.

Respondent: I will provide looking at what has been in place as I mentioned in the discussion.















































