Question 1
Interviewer:  So the first question that we have for you is that we want to understand your involvement in the PPP process under the AHDP, the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda. So, and my question will be first to try to understand if you're familiar with the African health diagnostic platform.

Respondent: Thank you. I'm not familiar with African health diagnostics platform. 

Interviewer: So you have never attended any meeting where this was discussed?

Respondent:  No, what I attended back in 2020, it was a workshop, organized by CHAI and the Ministry of Health. They were exploring the possibilities of using PPP frameworks for laboratory services in Rwanda, and they were discussing the pros and cons, looking at the different services and looking at that chain and also service delivery and which part of that chain would be most suitable to fall under PPP and which one wouldn’t.  And I remember we requested for the report out of that workshop I think CHAI was the one handling it, and we never received it. But my particular submission was mostly on the PPP processes that are provided under the regulations that we have and we were very clear that if you decide to take that PPP route, definitely, you must go through the processes that are provided for. And of course, as RDB we usually come in at the point of negotiation.
So, a contracting authority would have cited a bid and you go into the procurement process selected. And then you also have that part of the law that requires you to present a feasibility study to the steering committee. Once the steering committee agrees to it, then you move on to project contract negotiations. That's where we come in and support and lead. We help with drafting the negotiation, put it into a document, and then take it to the internal government processes for it to be approved. And then that is when at the end of it we handle it over back to the contracting authority which I think in this case would be MOH if we are dealing with a lab related PPP.

Interviewer: I have understood well so you come out quite late in the process, during the negotiations.

Respondent:  During negotiations, though we have had instances in the past on different projects where you know the investor comes in, maybe either to us, or to MOH, RBC, and has expressed interest in developing a project but we usually work with them through the process.  So, in the feasibility study sometimes we might be sitting as part of the technical team, but by heavily led and supported by the line ministry.  And then we gather input between financials, especially because we have some people who work on financials here. They will advise to see the viability of the proposed project, before we move on to approving it by the steering committee and then the contract negotiation.

Interviewer: But then as you were not actually involved in all the design, especially the design discussions because we were looking at how coming up with a final design, and all the discussions that happened before we come up with a final design and we're interested to get more insight into those discussions.                                                                                                                            But nevertheless, we still have some few questions for you. The most focused on PPP in Rwanda. 

Question 3
Interviewer: So, from your standpoint, what are the key issues that the PPP that aims to improve lab diagnostic services should focus on or include to be successful?

Respondent:  I think, in order for PPP to be successful. I think the prior initial steps are very important actually areas of the feasibility study. I will think it's important that whoever is leading either the line ministry or the proposed investor has adequate data to develop a good feasibility study. And that's going to look mostly on the technical and financial viability of the project or a percept of that PPP. So that, I have found it very important during the PPP process and it really feeds and determines how successful or unsuccessful a PPP will be at the end of the day. The results of the feasibility study definitely also inform what would be put into the contract between the parties. It would really also give you a good understanding of what the project implementation will look like. Because parties will have enough data and understanding what the findings are. You know what the loopholes are and what they're trying to achieve and fix in the system. So they'll be able to pretty much implement with some sense of direction and information. That's what I would propose.

Interviewer:  And what about the management and finance and aslo the capacity, because when you started PPP you had also to ensure that you have the capacity in your institution. What do you think about that?

Respondent:  I think that's a very pertinent point, definitely good management or, bad management can break the whole process or break that whole project. So it's very vital, those are things that come up during the contract negotiation that you're putting in, and adequate team, a team that is skilled and knowledgeable in this part.  And this is where PPP really comes to help because one of the objectives of a PPP is, public bodies are relying on private sector capacity and expertise, as well as even financing. So, really, you know as a government institution, as a public entity, you are looking to the private sector and you partner with them to bring in that extra level of skill set that you might not have in house, or even if you do, private sector could compliment it. So, during the negotiation, it's important that parties align on what the management will look like. What decision making processes will be in place to govern the project.
What happens when you know their disagreements you know how those are dealt with management, and that sort of thing? So it's really important that those are elements that parties discussed during the contract negotiation, and also try and leverage each other's skill set. So if you have a stronger skill set in public sector well and  good that could really be useful in management, but if you also have it in the private sector, you know, use it to your advantage for the purposes of the project.

Question 4
Interviewer:  What are the costs and benefits of pursuing PPP, especially for lab diagnostic at this stand? 

Respondent:  Well, I don't know if I can specifically answer for lab diagnostic. I would probably give advantages and disadvantages I guess of pursuing a PPP. Really most of the advantages:  you have an ability to share risk between partners.  So that's between public and private. Usually the risk will be allocated to the party that is more equipped, or best equipped to handle it and to deal with it. So it could be financial risk, technical risk whichever it is, but there is that advantage that you can share risk for purposes of the project. You also then have the ability to rely on private sector financing. It also relieves the public sector off you know spending so much to certain key areas such as health, educational, housing whichever it could be this allows the public sector to free up a bit of its budget, depending on its contribution towards the PPP, then you also have, as I said, the ability with a PPP in long term. So you're able to even plan futuristically for your community, for your society. It truly provide some comfort of knowing you taking the necessary steps at the beginning, you've procured the best person, and negotiated with them a solid contract. And this is going to govern an asset or a resource for quite a long period of the time you know you need that project will benefit the community for years to come.
Another advantage maybe about PPP as I said you rely on the private sector expertise. You know, partnering with a private sector, given the diversity of resources and talent, you really are able to tap into that sort of thing and gives a good flavor to that PPP arrangement.
Some of the disadvantages were that the timeline of the PPP will be long. As much as that could be a good thing, it can also be a bad thing. Some of these contracts extremely long they might be cost associated with terminating them earlier than anticipated. The private sector players may be claiming f you terminate early, you might have to reimburse them for the investment costs they have made, and that's quite a financial risk on the part of the public partner. There is disadvantage that they are long in terms of how they are structured.  Another disadvantage is that you might have cases of bad management. You might have cases where people get comfortable during the course of the project and they will be changed. For instance, there may be changes in the public sector, you might have new leaders coming in not following on understanding the objective of the previous leader. And that inconsistency may result in risk of t actually just terminating the contract, the need to throw the contract or project.
So those are some of the disadvantages but at least what we've seen in practice is that there are certainly more advantages than disadvantages. PPP really gives both parties, some level of comfort with executing very crucial but strategic projects with a society. 


Question 5
Interviewer: And the next question something that have a legal background so how supportive is the existing policy legal and regulatory framework for PPPs.

Respondent:  I think it's very supportive. Initiatives have been made to ensure that first of all the legal framework is up to date. Actually, with the business needs of the society, and also as provided for such different categories of where PPPs can be used to, it's been more structured. And that really provides more clarity, between partners. So I would say the legal framework is very supportive. It's very relevant, it looks at the different scenarios and has highlighted key sectors of the economy that are very instrumental in helping people in facilitating even better service delivery in the country.

Interviewer:  So based on your experience how much resistance do you see among policymakers to PPP?

Respondent:  I think there was a lot of resistance at the very beginning when, especially the new law and policy were being introduced. There was definitely a reservation on choosing to use a more structured, I mean going through all the current steps that are provided under the law. Most people thought it is too lengthy. They thought it would really take up a lot of time. It might even maybe push away the private sector, they thought people will lose interest when they see how extensive the process is.
But what we really try to do at the beginning and even continue doing, because we still get these comments, is to really show that for good PPP to work, it's important that you set up the right way, from the very beginning from day one. So, if you take it through the proper steps and the proper channel as much as you think, that's actually saving you time and money in the future because you would have given it such a good foundation that it will be able to stand and actually take off as a PPP project. So, most of the people prefer the procurement route where they can single source, they can really do things very quickly. But we have also seen you know there's a disadvantage with that because sometimes partnerships don’t work out and then you get into disputes,  you get into arguments, and that sort of thing.
So, definitely there's some resistance, based on the fact that of course this is new, we've introduced, a more detailed structure and how you take on how PPP project is exempted. I mean how it is from reception to closure. And what was the reason for this was we're trying to standardize our processes. You know we benchmark from different countries not only within Sub Saharan but really also on the rest of the continent. Because at the end of the day, you know, these are things that are making other countries progress and there's no reason why we should be left behind. So fine tuning this processes even attract better investors, the legal framework has created more transparency, you have more accountability, see things like the PPP steering committee coming in, you know you have contracting authority taking more responsibility, and that provides investors and private sector confidence in how we are doing things with PPP.


Interviewer:  And how flexible is the PPP to changes for example in government priorities.

Respondent: I'm sorry I maybe don't understand that question by flexible you mean, can you change to another model?

Interviewer:  Yes, yes

Respondent:  That may be a bit tricky. Especially as I have said if you have taken it to the right processes, according to the law. That may be a bit difficult. You might have to then terminate it, and then start afresh and choose another option if that is what parties have decided.

Interviewer:  Okay, so if we want to change something in the PPP, because we came up with a model and then we realized that maybe we should refine it and changes to a certain different type of model. So that means that will need to terminate it first? 

Respondent:  And when you say a different model what do you mean a financial model? Or for instance when you have decided to build on transfer PPP and then for instance you want to change it maybe to a joint venture is that kind of change you're talking about?

Interviewer:  All changes especially here for the lab diagnostics so they have different models so some models where they were proposing For example, co-management between the government and the private partner, and the model all where we will just decide  to go for privatization.

Respondent:  Okay. The important thing here is you have to be clear on what you're calling a PPP what you're calling privatization. What you're calling a sale, because you have to be careful not to mix up these terms. The law clearly provides what categories of contracts or niche agreements would fall under a PPP. So I think we have about four or five just double check. There's a build on and operate. That’s where may be government allows you to build on that asset and allows you to operate it. And then there is a build on and transfer where at the end of a specific term that asset it will be sent, transferred back to government.                                                We have management agreements as well. And then we have lease operate and develop. So where the government will lease an asset, operate it and then develop it at some point. Yeah. Now when you bring in something like privatization in its strict sense means that you're relinquishing all ownership rights over an asset. So you're giving it away completely to the private sector, forever. You're not going to then come back and say, you know, give me back my asset, because they've paid for it. The private sector is now the owner, that is privatization and that's completely different from what PPP is.

Interviewer:  I read the document and looking at the description and characteristics, it looked like the new that one the lease operate and develop. Give the lab sector, the lab network to a private partner that has expertise in how to manage these labs. The different labs that we have in the country. And that question that company that private partner will operate these labs but also develop for a certain period of time.  Was co-management so that the government will have some responsibilities with, and the private partner also will have some responsibilities.


Respondent:  So in that case, if it's a co management. You know that wouldn’t go through the PPP process as provided by the law. I think that's something, then either the hospital or through MOH or RBC, can then maybe put out a tender, looking for co-managers, you get a pool of interested people you select, and then you get into those separate co management agreements with them. So that would be, pretty much just take on an ordinary contract arrangement, as opposed to a PPP that's more detailed and has to go through a feasibility study process, clearance and that sort of thing. So, coming back to your question of can it change? It would make more sense if it's a lease operate and develop for example, at the beginning, that's what parties have agreed to have negotiated.
I just want to maybe try and see if I got your question right when you asking, can it change for instance from lease operate and develop to a management contract. Well, that is something you will have to discuss as parties, we have not seen it in practice. I have not seen anyone change their structure midway project; I have not really seen that before. So, I'm not very sure if that's possible.

Interviewer: All the other way around coming from the management, this lease, operate and develop, so you have never seen that.

Respondent: I haven't seen parties switch the nature of the contracts especially with the PPPs because they've really taken a lot of time to negotiate at the beginning. And really tried to factor in all risks you know all possible mishaps. You know there are so many things that have gone into that process. So it's a bit hard to tell if someone can just change I haven't seen that in practice in my time here.

Question 6
Interviewer: Historically, how the public and the private sectors are focusing on health, how have they interacted in the past years?

Respondent:  I haven't seen that many PPPs in health, there's one that we're hoping will take effect they are still at the feasibility study stage. It looks promising. They have taken quite a long time developing the feasibility study, but that is because it went to the process provided for under the law, so they are expected to have that feasibility study done approved by the contracting authority submitted to the steering committee, before it progresses to contract negotiation.  But the rest of the contracts we have seen in health you know they're outside the PPP format. So you'll have management or service contracts you know between the public sector and the private partner.

Interviewer: And the collaboration between two partners how do you find it? Is this like they trust really each other, does the relationship really smooth between the two partners.

Respondent: You mean between the private and public?

Interviewer:  Yes, the private and the public sector, especially in health.

Respondent: I think there's a lot of good faith, between the parties, there's a lot of collaboration. I think it's an area that both partners are willing to explore willing to get into business on with. So, I think it's very good I think it's very positive.

Interviewer:  So, you said something that I want us to better understand you said that the most of the contracts for the health sector are out of the PPP.

Respondent:  If either one I've seen and if you're talking about PPP according to the law. Just for clarity.

Interviewer: Okay. So, can you tell me according to the law, what is a PPP, just for me to better understand?

Respondent: Well, maybe just also for your own reading the current law is called its implementation of the law number 14/2016. In second may 2016 governing public private partnerships. So, that was passed about 2016, 2017 I believe. Let me just pull up the exact definition so that we may be clear for the get go.
When you talk about PPPs and that's the struggle we're having and I think it was one of the things we kept debating on at that workshop in 2020.We keep mixing up what a PPP is, I think we're just have this understanding of if you have a government or public office and private partner done that's a PPP. But no that's not a PPP.
You need to fall within the categories that the law has provided for. And when you go through the law you actually see it provides for a clarity on what these structures look like. So, it's very important, PPP’s main characteristic is that they are long term agreements. They are between definitely public partner and private partner and is definitely an aspect of, even the whole element of how they come into play, how they come into existence. That's also something that is taken into consideration, but the Law does provide quite a detailed understanding of what the PPPs are.

Interviewer: Thank you, this makes things more clearly.

Question 7
Interviewer: Yeah. The next question is, how health system governance arrangements affect the design of the PPP, you know, I think it's also applicable to the administrative governance that then the governance in general that we have in Rwanda,

Respondent: I have not seen it yet, I have no idea.

Interviewer:  Especially if you are implementing the PPP and you have this different level of decisions. Who is going to be held accountable if it's a PPP that is going to be implemented at the lower level, and you have these two layers of decisions?
If something happens, who is going to be held accountable, easy cutter for during the design or, I don't know.

Respondent:  I haven't dealt with that particularly but if I was to speculate I would assume that's something that you negotiate and agree on how management will work.  That's all I can think of.

Interviewer:  Yeah. So, meaning that one when you are working on the PPP this is something that you should plan ahead and negotiate and set it clear.

Respondent:  Yes, I would advise that too.

Question 8
Interviewer: Next question is asking. Maybe you may not have much information about that. But we are looking at investments and interest from the government in lab diagnostic.

Respondent: I don't know if I can answer that.

Interviewer:  So you've been working in different sector except from the PPP that you were just mentioning that is currently ongoing, have you worked on any other PPP in the health sector before?

Respondent: No, I have not. 

Interviewer:  So you've been working mainly in which sector.

Respondent:  It really varies from forestry to agriculture to tourism to ICT to energy, mining to mention few.

Interviewer:  Is this because there are few people in health sector or, because maybe by chance you just don't work in health.

Respondent:  I haven't seen that many people up in the health sector, genuinely, this is the  one that we are hoping will be materialized  but as I said it's at the  feasibility study stage.

Interviewer:  Okay, interesting. But then, all the service contracting,  So that means that this doesn't go through RDB, no.

Respondent:  They will not. Sometimes they will still negotiate them but they won't go through for instance the PPP steering committee, they most likely will not have feasibility studies done, which is very pertinent for PPP project you must have a feasibility study.

Question 9
Interviewer: So, okay then for a PPP who are the stakeholders that should be involved, when you're developing a PPP. Let's say we have this PPP in health, what are the key stakeholders that should be involved.

Respondent:  Align ministry so Ministry of Health. You might want to have Ministry of Finance in case any budgetary financial contribution. And I guess I don't know who else was under the Ministry of health with any technical parties would be good as well. Maybe RBC as well, depending on what objective is.

Interviewer:  No any other like government institution?

Respondent:  You would have to depend on what the project is about and what the objective is.

Interviewer: So yeah, and do you have for example this one was around laboratory diagnostics. So what about the health facilities should they be also involved in developing the PPP

Respondent:  I'm not sure I think that would be a decision for a centralized level to decide who they would need for the purposes of developing the PPP and the discussion.

Interviewer: But then, when we look at these key stakeholders. What is their influence in driving the PPP?

Respondent: What do you mean in driving the PPP mean the process or actual implementation of the project? 

Interviewer: The process, because we are still at this phase of the process. So especially when they are designing the PPP and when it comes to negotiations.

Respondent:  I think that would really depend on what the ministry would lead on the technical part, it would come in with some district I don't know whoever feel is necessary for the purposes of the project. They might be instrumental in reviewing the feasibility study findings, develop with a private partner and give feedback. I think that is maybe a crucial role that they can play, and definitely provide any technical input during contract negotiation.

Interviewer:  And what about RDB you didn't list, actually it's now, RDB before the key stakeholders, when you're developing the PPP shouldn't RDB be there?

Respondent: We come in at the point of contract negotiation. Again, that's also provided for another look on what our role is.

Interviewer:  And doing now, contract negotiation. What is your role?

Respondent:  We lead the negotiations we help draft conduct the meetings; we review, we take the project documents through the internal approval processes, we ensure that all the parties concerns are catered for we try and get the best positions for each party, and then ensure that’s reflected in the document. 

Question 12
Interviewer: And then, so how based on your experience with other PPP how interested are private partners to participate in the PPP. For instance what are their incentives to participate, what are their drawbacks?

Respondent:  I think I would defer to the Investment court; I am sure there are some benefits that are provided for generally incentive that would be enticing to investors in any sector, there are some that are very general: you have the corporate income tax holidays, you have immigration incentives, you might also input duty incentives where you permitted a certain incentive the importing equipment what a certain amount. I think those are the things that would drive private sector interest. And that's what government has done to create a favorable investment climate. For those particular reasons. So I would defer to the investment court. Definitely I think during your research you can definitely look at the incentives dedicated to the health sector and get an idea of what would drive private sector involvement in that.

Interviewer: And then what are the drawbacks?

Respondent:  I think that the drawbacks are, I’m just speculating I'm not sure.

Interviewer: There is no problem it's based on what you learned.

Respondent:  I think health is a very sensitive sector. I think it's one that has been predominantly and historically led by governments. Very people centric so you have to be careful with how you manage such service, you know, things like education and health almost put them in the same category, they're very particular with how they should be handled so I think you know you have a bit of that may be reservation but the bit of it is that you know these are sectors that have also been evolving over time you have telemedicine coming up. You have so many innovations in the health sector coming up as well. And another thing government has done is to also move with the times and ensure that it's facilitating all these innovations. So that's why I'm saying when you look at the incentives. You know they’re really encouraging to innovators and investors not only in health sector but in various sectors, so the drawbacks would only pick up the sensitivity of the sector, that may create some level of a drawbacks, but you know people are getting more creative every other day.

Question 12
Interviewer:  This is the last question for you. How the PPP could be designed to achieve scale up and sustainability.

Respondent:  It would be based on the findings of the feasibility study that will inform how you should design it.  That's why I would say it depends on what the findings are, what the financial and technical viability looks like. You look at the parties’ strength and then you decide which format under the law would make more sense to both of you.

Interviewer:  And then for sustainability when we go for PPP we want something that will actually address the challenges the issues that we have in whatever systems we're working with, If someone wanted to get working on a PPP in whatever sector. So what would you advise especially for the sustainability component? What should we look at? 

Respondent: I think that would be informed still by a feasibility study it should show you how viable the project is, so you'll be able to determine how you can sustain it.  Do you need to take out a loan? How are you going to finance it? Do you have enough equity, you know all those things if you're going to look at the kind of equipment you're using, what are the management costs related to it, is it something that you can sustain? I think your feasibility study if you take good time to develop it, that informs you because you might bring information to then implement the project correctly and in a sustainable manner.

Interviewer: So, this is the last one, but this is for you actually so if there is anything that you would like to add on what we have discussed.


Respondent:  No, Thank you.

Interviewer: Thank you for your time. And we're very glad that you've been able to find some time to discuss with us. And this will help this evaluation, and it will be really helpful for us to understand better the PPP process and PPP implementation at the country level, that will help also this evaluation that we are doing for the AHDP project.
 So, thank you. Take care.


















