Question 1
Interviewer: The first question that we have for you, can you tell us your role and how you were involved in laboratory diagnostics in Rwanda? 

Respondent: No, I'm not involved. I'm not involved in lab, we provide supports to the ministry of health on how to do PPP in health sector by offering the guidance on financial and economic component, and financial support as well in case needed.
Question 2
Interviewer: Yeah. Okay. So you are not familiar with African Health Diagnostic Platform currently being discussed in Rwanda?

Respondent:  I don't know about that project. 

Question 3
Interviewer: Yeah. And from your standpoint, what are the key issues that a PPP aiming to improve laboratory diagnostic services should focus on to be successful? 

Respondent: That's basically the technical question for ministry of health. And when we do PPP as a country this is just for us to transfer risks to private partner or attracting financing for a given project. So for this particular labs management in Rwanda for technical aspects, the ministry of health is in the position to elaborate more. 

Question 4
Interviewer: And maybe for you, the specific question would be what are the costs and benefits of pursuing a PPP in laboratory diagnostics 

Respondent: Those should be educated by the feasibility study findings. I cannot discuss findings if I don't have the feasibility study conducted. 

Interviewer: So the study should highlight this, according to you?

Respondent: The  major objective of a PPP feasibility study, whether labs or health sector in general or any other sector is to indicate, what kind of PPP arrangement to undertake, whether it is Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) or they Build, Operate and Own (BOO), or contract management. Those are the areas that a feasibility study should clearly indicate

Question 5
Interviewer: Okay. And now, how supportive is the existing policy or legal framework in Rwanda with regards to PPP?

Respondent:  We have PPP law we have also, PPP feasibility study guidelines, which tries to guide sectors, including the health sector on how to proceed with PPP.
It is clear in our PPP law that a PPP project can be solicited or, unsolicited. Unsolicited is when government can target the private partner to work with, to implement a specific project. A solicited is when A private partner can come and propose the implementation of PPP, what I know the PPP relapse In labs, the feasibility study is ongoing where the minister of health is leading on that the technical team is on board, which reports directly to  the PPP steering committee. So we have got a graph of the PPP study in labs, which is under the review. We have got to indicate some areas where improvement is needed, especially on the  financial viability of the project. So the project is, is current under improvement. 

Interviewer: Okay. If you can elaborate more about that improvement that is being done is it about laboratory networks, is it the sample transportation?


Respondent: A PPP feasibility study has three major components. One is the technical component. That normally is reviewed and confirmed by the contracting authority. If we say contracting authority in this case, it is MOH. There is another component called financial and economic viability of the project. Once it is technically feasible, it must be financially viable for the investor to come and invest in the project. It must be economically viable, especially for the government. If we say financial viability, it is when it has financial returns both to the investors as government and private party. 
If it is economically viable that part is mostly for the government cause it relates with job creation, taxes and all of that. So basically for a project to be attractive, it should be financially and economically viable. But first of all, it should be technically feasible otherwise there is no reason even to go into the assessment of the financial and economic viability of the project. I don’t know if am answering your question.


Interviewer: Yeah. Actually what you say is very important for us because for a successful PPP it has to go through all those mentioned steps.

Respondent: Let me give you a quick scenario, especially for us MINECOFIN. That's why I was saying, I will give you a general overview of how MINECOFIN oversee the implementation of the PPP in Rwanda, when a project is financially, whether we have health sector or agriculture or construction, any other sector, when a project is financially viable and economically viable, that project should be implemented by a private sector, whether in PPP or a private party alone. But when it is financially feasible, not economically feasible, that product is mainly implemented by the private investor. When it is only economically feasible, that really should be implemented by the government.                                                                                                                                      So in the case of the PPP labs the preliminary findings indicated that the project is economic viable, but not financially viable. So that's why there are some components where the technical team said go and improve on this. And then we shall see whether the project is still not financially feasible. I cannot give the details of what made this project, not financially viable. So those are the scenarios I wanted you to understand whether in health sector or any other sector, but specifically for the labs, the preliminary findings indicated that the project is not financially viable.


Interviewer: So it means according to what you mentioned, it should be implemented by?

Respondent: In this case, it can be implemented only by the government because it is economically viable. But the major reasons were from the projected revenues where the revenues should come from, the reagents and consumables, the number of tests, trainings, and other expenditure were not making the projects financially viable. If the consumables and reagents they can change in either direction, so if they can increase or decrease, you can understand how the findings are going to be, what I know is that the preliminary reports that we have, the technical team has indicated that the feasibility study of the project is not financially viable, you can understand that you would not keep asking me the questions around the technical viability because those are the technical aspects, that is not my area, mine is finance and economics. I cannot comment on the technical part. What we do is just to help the sectors, to understand the importance of how assessing the economic and financial viability of the project. 


Question 7
Interviewer: Thank you very much, actually. That is very clear. And maybe my next question is to know who should be held accountable for the success of PPP. 

Respondent: No, it depends at what stage the PPP is. Is it under implementation? Is it under study? So I want to clearly understand at which stage you are talking about? 

Follow up Interviewer’s question: Maybe the whole process of the PPP project, from starting to the deliverables under the selected contract modalities or PPP

Respondent: If I can get you well, we should note that there are different stages of the PPP Project. I'm not sure if you can hold accountable someone for a project that is not yet started. So once it has already started, of course before you go into the implementation of the PPP there is a concession agreements that is signed, normally our PPPs are for 25 years concession period government has obligations and the private party has obligations depending on the nature of   arrangement of the project, if it's a BOT, BOO or contract management. So in this case we were trying to see how the guidance was to check the operational and management of the labs. So, depending on the nature of the arrangement, we can be able to identify who is accountable for the success of the PPP, because each party has obligation. Government has obligations to fulfill, and the private party has obligations to fulfill during the concession period. 

Question 8
Interviewer: Historically, what has been the investments and interest from the government in laboratory diagnostics? 


Respondent: Yeah, like I said the contracting authority in this case, Ministry of health, according to our PPP law, MOH can initiate the PPP project or a private partner can come up with a proposal for the implementation of lab Management, for example in our hospitals. So the feasibility study is ongoing and is at technical level we have provided our feedback to the institution that is conducting and supporting technically on the feasibility study. 

Question 9
Interviewer: Okay. So who are key stakeholders that should be involved in developing the PPP and why?

Respondent: First of all, we have a contracting authority in this case it is the ministry of health. Because you are interested in health sector, in order words it can be RBC, but not a hospital. Because a hospital is not a contracting authority nor a budget agency, they should go through their line ministry. We have RDB, according to our law is the chief negotiator. When it comes to PPP implementation, There also MOF for the finance and economic planning. If there is areas to do with the infrastructure, we should have Ministry of infrastructure in case they need water, electricity, access to land, those are the agencies of public in most cases, involve in PPP assessment not implementation. 


Interviewer: And at international level, is there other key stakeholders who should be involved as well? 

Respondent: In the case we need support on transaction, if we need further capacities or transaction, we normally engage some institutions.
Interviewer:  And what about funders are they also involved?

Respondent: No it depends on the sector we have a pool of technical advisor who are in a position to provide the support needed, whether in terms of negotiating, whether we need further capacities with the private party, especially in areas where we think we don't have local capacities. 

Question 12
Interviewer: Yeah. Thank you very much. What are the factors now which can facilitate or attract the private partners to be involved in the PPP?

Respondent: There are very many, first of all our NST1 National Strategic for transformation indicate that our economy should be a private sectored economy that where we have RDB. If you have a project and from the assessment, the analysis or from the feasibility study, the findings indicate that the project is financially viable, we normally take that project to private sector to come and implement the project. So the government policies, including our national Investment policy clearly indicate we should have private sector engagement in doing the implementation of the major projects. 

Interviewer: And what kind of biggest incentives for private partners to participate in the PPP?

Respondent: We have incentives under investment code. Yes. Including tax exemption, infrastructure access. For example, you want to build a hospital. The government provides with you access load, internet, connectivity, water electricity, for you to be able to implement your project. 
For example, you want to come up with a good lab in Rwanda, the government will ensure that you have internet for you in case you have big software to run your lab, if the investments is over 50 billion there is a list of incentives under the investment code individually.


Interviewer: And what are the biggest drawbacks for private sector to participate in PPP?

Respondent: So far, there is no obstacles because you have incentives. We have good environment that attracts private sector to come and partner with government of Rwanda. We have the different capacities locally that if you come and do a project, there is some capacity that you don't need to go and outsource outside. So I think so far, I don’t see any issues with private sector who partner with the government. 


Interviewer: So do you think that the private partners working in a laboratory diagnostics in country have the capacity to participate and deliver on PPP? 

Respondent: I'm not sure if you have a PPP project in labs, there is no PPP project. What you have is in the pilot phase. We are trying to check on how to roll out actually, so we welcome many private partners to come and work with government as a private partner in PPP. 


Question 13 
Interviewer: How could the PPP be designed to achieve scale up and sustainability?

Respondent: Because like I said before, a PPP feasibility study has three major components because there are others. One is the technical feasibility of the project, is labs technical feasible in Rwanda, can we have labs that can produce different tests with this kind of technology? Is it feasible in Rwanda? Do we have hospital that can accommodate these type of labs in Rwanda? And then if it is technically feasible, whether you do a pilot phase, you need to roll out. But if you want to conduct a pilot, you do what we call pre-feasibility study. So once is technically feasible, like I said before. So in other words, this can be feasible in Rwanda. I don't know whether maybe you want to rollouts across?

Interviewer: May be geographic scalability? 

Respondent: No, this is what the feasibility study does. The study should be able to assess the technical viability of the project. Can a lab be accommodated in a health post? Those are the areas that technical part or component of the study assesses. And then you go into other components including financial and economic viability and other components, but if we want to conduct a pilot, you go to the pre-feasibility study and when it works, you roll out. 

Question 14
Interviewer: Thank you so much. So now which are different sources of funding are expected to be used for financing diagnostics?
Respondent: There are two sources the one is the private investor, second is government of Rwanda and government of Rwanda has different sources, domestic finances and external financing. And again, it depends on the nature of the PPP project. We have PPP projects where an investor can come and say, I'm going to build a facility, let's say hospital, and then I'm going to run it over 30 years and then transfer it to the government. But in that case what the government does, is to provide a land and an infrastructure as I was saying, so in that case, who is financing the project, it's the private sector.                                                                               So there is other cases where they can form a joint-venture, each party bring 50, and then you implement the project. So in those cases, it's private investor and government, for the investor may be the financing will come from borrowing, while for the government it will come from domestic financing or external financing. It depends also on the findings of the feasibility study. So specifically for the Labs we are trying to assess on how the investor can equip all the health facilities and then we collect through testes because it's just to upgrade our existing labs.                   So the study is trying to assess different options. The PPP feasibility study in most cases we commend sectors to do what we call option analysis, to test different options and then check the option that that is good for government.

Interviewer: Are the national health insurances also can be involved in?

Respondent: Those are stakeholders. Because the hospitals, collect living through insurance premiums. So those are clients. Those are clients like any other client. 


Question 15
Interviewer: So I think many questions I have tackled on them, so unless you have anything else you would like to discuss about the PPP that we have not talked about. 

Respondent: No, I don’t think I have much to add because the PPP area in Rwanda is nearly new. We still have opportunities for people to know and come and do the projects with government. So in health sector, there are many areas of PPP. We have lots of hospitals, but according to our NST1 we have targets to reach. So if we can get investors to build some hospitals in Rwanda, it's an area that government can consider even more incentives. And specifically for Labs, you know, the government through the ministry of health are trying to improve health service delivery. So if your labs are not providing, good services to patients do not expect the good health service delivery that why this study, once it is done there is a lot to do with the hospitals and even down to the posts, but currently they study is trying to cover the hospitals. 

Interviewer: Thank you very much for your time and we shall be interacting with you in case the PPP moves ahead to contracting. I wish you a good evening.




