Question 1.
Interviewer: So, the first question that we have in regards to this initiative is to understand if you are involved during the AHDP PPP process design process negotiation. 

Respondent: No

Interviewer: No. So, you didn't hear about this initiative before? 

Respondent: I heard about the PPP between discussions but we have never been involved in this.

Interviewer:  So, then I'm going to go to some questions that we have that are more general in regards to PPP so for you said that you have heard about PPP. Yes. 

Question 8.
Interviewer: How would an ideal PPP design accommodate the needs of people, the priority population that we have in our country? 

Respondent: I suppose this PPP should be a collaboration between the various partners to lead to a task. And in this case, I believe the task is to provide a better health care for the people in the country.


Question 9.
Interviewer: You know, the context of Rwanda, actually I think, you know, somehow the context, the different issues that we have? 

Respondent: I know some issues. Yes. I know.  I am the business person for many years, and I know somehow issues especially that we are facing in the lab sector.

Interviewer:  What will be an ideal PPP design accommodate the needs of priority populations for you that will address these issues? 

Respondent:  For us, we have been in the business of the laboratory and medical equipment for quite many years. We have worked here in the, in the country and we, I can definitely state certain problems, which, I see encountered in the health provision.  Number one is the procurement process. I believe there is a problem in the procurement process overall, with regards to you see the system here is that each laboratory gives the needs for their testing. And then this is all tabulate, centralized by May be RNL or RBC. And then there is a procurement process. Now for me, I believe that sometimes sector nine teams are missing from the procurement so before they even start the procurement plan, they should consult with us and agree on a list of items that they are required for the process so things are not left out, okay imagine that in order to perform analysis, you need three components. If you buy the two components and the third component is not bought, then you cannot perform the, this is one of the problemsAnother one is the training of the users of the facilities we have a case in Rwanda one that apparently you have a high turnover of operators. Let us see that today. You have somebody who works or is allocated to work with a machine. You train, he gets some experience. And after a few months, he migrates to somewhere else. And they keep on moving. So, the knowhow that they have for that machine is gone. Then you have a treasure again. So, this creates a problem. Okay why they are keep moving. I really don't know but, I see non stability in the operators.   Another thing which we encounter is the process of the procurement, you in the procurement an institution we used to deal with all different hospitals in the past. Okay. So, an institution raises an LPO, has a contract. It raises an LPO. We deliver some products now to complete the procurement cycle. The hospital has to pay. We had a lot of difficulties of getting the money back. So, I give you the reagents. Then I come to look for the money. Then you have 1000 excuses then this obviously creates a problem. So how do I provide more products to you if you are, have not paid my previews provisions?  Another thing which is there is that as you know, that in Rwanda, a lot of these analysis is covered by insurance. Second of the products they are either not covered by the insurance or they are undercover to give you an example there is a test which is called for example, HbA1C It's a parameter, which you analyze for the diabetics. And it is a very important to know, even the diabetic behaves in consumption of sugar. Okay. Now HbA1c is one of the expensive parameters, and apparently, we find a lot of hospitals are not running the HbA1C because the value which is covered by the insurance is very low. Okay. Because of the cost of the test, let's say that is $1, but the insurance covers half dollar then when you go to a patient, he has to cover the rest. Maybe he doesn't have half a dollar to pay the rest. So the effect of that is that the analysis is not wrong. When you don't learn this analysis, you sacrifice the diabetic health and side effects. I also say side effects because you know that if, uh, uh, a patient does not, uh, monitor the glucose to a good level it has consequences. Okay. You end up with side effects that they are serious and sugar, for example, it's an illness. If I can call it an illness, which is very silent, you don't have a pain, you don't have anything you don't have. There are effects that they come afterwards, but when they come, maybe it's too late you can have kidney failure. Now, let me tell you, as government, as a system here, you don't pay $1. I just give an example about the value. You don't pay $1 to perform this analysis, and you could do analysis for the patient. Let's say twice or three times a year. So is $3. You don't do this $3 expense, and you come after five years in five years, maybe you save $20, but then you have a patient who needs a transplant. 
A kidney transplants. You, you can imagine what is needed to perform a kidney with transplant expenses the health issues and everything. So, we don't do a proactive because somebody set up a wrong price in the insurance and then this has consequences in doing, transplants, which could be avoided. We have also, for example, various tests that we do for prognosis. We have, for example prosthetic specific antigen PSA now in the development world, every male, about 40, 45 50. He performs at least once per year or twice per year, the analysis PSA for prostate. Okay.  It gives you an elderly warning of a prostate cancer. Okay. Possibility of a prostate cancer. Yeah. So, if you screen the population, it means that you can stop. You can treat a prostate cancer, right? At the beginning of being developed with the first signs But in order to do this, you need to run the test. You don't run the test, but you end up in having people developing cancer of prostate, and they didn't know, again, prostate cancer. Yes. It will not show you by the time you have effects the prostate already, maybe done the damage the same thing happens with other tests like breast cancer.  You can have checks on women. There are directives with women, opposed to, they are developing a cancer and breast cancer. So, you can screen either with x-ray some other diagnostic tests. 
 If we don't do this, we are allowing the people to move to a second stage and the cancer is more difficult to be treated. Yeah. And you have very difficult healthy situations just because you did not screen and you didn't know about it. HPV, the HPV is human Papilloma virus. Yes many women, they can develop cancer, but HPV, if it is Diagnosed at the beginning, then it's treated and no side effects, no cancer.  Actually, there is a lot of work which is done in Rwanda recently about the HPV it came as a directive and I think they are treated there's screening all the women in the range of I don't know which age range, but the one which was decided. And I think they also do vaccination for the young girls because it's important to deliver vaccination before, somebody, is already attacked by HPV now so that's why they do it at a young age before this sex activity of the young girls, so once they are vaccinated, then they are not vulnerable to these values.  So, these are some of the examples of tests not being done, but at the end of the day, they have this side effects of serious health implications. So, we said about procurement, about availability of the, of the tests. Yes, training of users, and also proper workflow of products you see, you have a laboratory and they stop running analysis because they do not have products available. 
I don't know how the procurement is done laboratory. If you start currently with the laboratories that they have machines, so you have the machine, you run analysis, what you need is a, is a continuous flow of products.  Now, when we come to procurement of product, the procurement is not done on time or is not done by taking it to consideration the real needs of the laboratories and and not in a sustainable case. So, let's say that I run analysis of glucose. Let's say but I received my kits today. I run I run. 
Then I run out of kits and I don't have anymore. So, then I panic. Then you call the RMS But RMS needs time to procure. Okay. So, it means that if you are now that you, between have more reagents, it will take one, two months. You have reagents because the reagents, many times they are not all available in country so they have to order. We have to bring; we have to deliver them. They have to deliver. So, it takes a long time, but this time the laboratory remains without testing Also in the procurement procedure here many times they are asking one of the problems, which is related is with regards to the shelf life of the reagents. So the leaders, when they are produced, they have a kind of a shelf life let's say one year. 
 but the procure needs shelf lives of, if I can provide shelf lives of six months, for example, they are asking for one year, but the maximum is one year when they are produced. By the time they are produced, they are checked. They are whatever they are shipped, they are delivered. A lot of that time has gone. Okay. So, but let's say from our side, what do we do is that we give them the minimum expected shelf life. When we deliver our products, what does this mean? Is that, although the product, when is producing may have let's say one year of shelf life many times they are asking for 75% of remain shelf life when we deliver. So they inquire for example, eight to nine months of shelf, but we cannot promise that we cannot fulfill that one. I cannot produce a brain I buy from somebody else from the factory and the factory has its own regulations. And they say okay, I cannot give you right after production. But what I can do is that I give a minimum shelf life that I can deliver. So if we start, for example, let's say glucose. If it has 12 months of shelf, life upon production we say that we can deliver with six months minimum shelf life. Because you see the factory does not produce and deliver it produce and has a buffer of produce reagents to distribute in the whole world. Okay. And you cannot produce every day you have a production life and you have so many different reagents that you have to produce. So the machine today is producing one test tomorrow, another test tomorrow, and another test. So they produce enough to keep them going for a period of time. So if we go back to the factory and say, we need fresh load to start with, they will not accept okay. But even if they, if you said fresh a lot, it means that you have to wait until the machine is located to produce that reagent. It may take five months so you don't have reuse for five months. 
So what we suggested and I suggest to my customers is that let us work through a pattern of ordering throughout the year to maintain that supplies are available and they have enough shelf life to keep you going without what does it mean? If we take a hospital if they need, let's say six kits, you take a hospital which needs six kits of glucose every year, instead of placing now an order and say, I need six kits with one year shelf life, because I want to spend these supplies in one year. What do we say to them is that our Health Net cannot be one year. It will be six months. So six months when I deliver and is taken by the laboratory and is used instead of 36, why don't you order every quarter, order two in January, you order two in May, order two in October.  There is no extra charge on delivering multiple times. Okay? So we deliver two here, but you have six months to consume. Mm-hmm you will consume within three or four months, then you receive your other two and then you receive the other two. So you do not waste the reagent as expired. Okay. But we have to do this planning. So all this planning it will start from the needs of every laboratory. So every laboratory has to say that we need to run so many tests of glucose, AST, ALT, cholesterol, Triglycerides, HDL, they produce their list. We, we tabulate for each customer. What is their annual need? Then we split this either quarterly or accordingly to the different type of products. And we say that we have to deliver this after three months, this after three months, and this after three months, this okay. 
You understand? Yeah. So there is coordination, which is needed and you have people also to give you correct figures because if I run, let's say 1000 tests every year, but when I declare I declare 500, it means that I will run out of reagents and I will not have reagents to supply. On the other hand, if you need 1000 tests, if you run 1000 tests, but then you say, I get 2000 tests, you will have extra supplies. And these supplies may expire and not being used. So, money is wasted so this has to be work through proper data and make a proper planning. But obviously this has to be reviewed. Let's say, let us go back to the laboratory and say, okay, you have these reagents, you, you, you requested these tests. We provided these tests. Have you consume all your reagents, any reagents that you were missing because under estimation, then we cannot adjust the quantities for the next year. So, we end up in a pattern that they order enough quantities to keep them going without running out and without throwing things away. This is very important. 


Interviewer: What is for you? The ideal, like design, how you, as a private partner could work hand in hand with the government to improve the lab services in government facilities. 

Respondent: Okay. I will give you also an example here just to compliment my comments and comment on what you are asking. Yes. Is that in the past we had either sold or placed machines in the market. Okay. And then the hospitals were purchasing from us at the time. It was the hospital each hospital was doing purchases. Then about two, three years ago, we heard of a PPP to be done with Abbott. So we had our machines, let's say in 50 hospitals and suddenly, and out of them blue, we had machines from Abbott installed next to our machines in the same hospital. Mm-hmm a lot of the hospitals, they stop buying from us. Okay. Obviously, they run out, they run on problems with Abbott but also then they came back to us then whatever. So if the government wanted to do this partnership, you had a company which proposed that, oh, don't worry. 
I will bring machines. I will run your test. I will do whatever, but you already have machines. So why the government has gone to monopoly system to say, okay, they obviously, they entrusted what Abbott have said. I don't know how much of that they fulfill. So they entrusted that they will have machines, every reagents and everything, everything running very nicely, every patient will have access testing, but then they have problems with machines problem with reagents problem, with pricing problems, problems. So, what I will say is that I'm sure that the ministry of health knew of the machines that they were in the place. So, when Abbott came here and they proposed a PPP, if I was the ministry of health, I will have called in also other stakeholders and say, listen, guys, I'm looking for running my laboratories in this concept. What are your comments? What is your pricing? What is, what do you need in the country? What do you understand? So, you utilize what you have there before you start bringing other machines.So, I believe that before a wide scale PPP it has to be well thought to see the advantage and the disadvantage and see how you can utilize what you have before you start a new, because imagine now we have maybe 50 Abbott machines sitting in 50 laboratories. You have 50 rush machines sitting in the same laboratories. And if a new company comes, if you didn't come to me, you went to another company for a PPP. And they say, the first thing you have to do is to give you machines. Then in the same laboratory, you will have three machines. Huh? Why do you need this expenditure to, to be there and the money not being utilized to run the analysis rather than bringing a new machine, you have machine use it. Yeah. 


Question 14.
Interviewer: So, I would like to, because these PPP you were not necessarily involved in all the steps and negotiation but I would like to ask you if specially to talk about your experience in PPP with Rwanda and how this new initiative can learn from what you have done in the past here in Rwanda. 

Respondent: From my side, as I said on before, when we discussed about 10 days ago, we will have no problem to work with the government or any other organization providing goods and services in a way that these are used efficiently and producing results for the patients.  We are here. We said that we have a lot of instruments in the market. We can also assist in sometimes bringing in extra machines for placement or for selling you see, there are models that you can place a machine. Yeah. you place a machine, but then you sell your reagents at the somehow higher price in order to make up for your investment. But here in Rwanda, I find out that the people do not respect so much the placement model. 
 
When you ask me to make a placement for me, I have an investment. Okay. So, I can give you a machine. I can place a machine. A machine has a cost and I'm not a non-profitable organization. I'm a company for profit. I have my expenses and I have my investments, and I need some returns. So, a proper placement it will be to evaluate what the needs of the laboratory are. See the expected purchases and mega placement. But then you expect that the customer will fulfill the promised supplies. The purchase of re agents. Let's say we had cases that replace machines in hospitals, big hospital in Kigali government
Now we started a contract with KA. This is what the, there was a tender for this hospital machine for placement for three years, we commended the three years or not enough, because, you know, when you have a big investment, you cannot make up your investments returns in as your short period of time, they rejected. They say three years, and then renewable, we place a machine. We sold reagents once or twice, they stopped by. We try to push, and we say, we have a contract here. You have to buy there's no; we have to remove the machines from there. So this, it makes me to feel consented the next time I have to place a machine, you know, how can you refuse to buy from me? You buy from Abbott or any other company for your own reasons, You are free to buy, but you had a tender and you had a placement why you didn't fulfill the conditions of the placement, you know? So yeah. We have to respect also of both sides.  we are here to sell, make some profit from our side, the minister, on the other side, they have to procure and to procure at the, at a good level of pricing, not to be cheated, whatever, and the machines to work and produce results for the patient at the end of the day, will we should all act in a way to give, facilitate the patient to do analysis in an affordable way. 

Question 16.
Interviewer: So, and how for you, what are these stakeholders that should sit around that table to be able to provide that information needed?

Respondent: I believe it should be the ministry of health as a coordinator, because they are involved in the provision of the health services. Yes, it should be funders in case of money needed from funding or somebody who to provide the money, which is needed.  If it's not from funding, then it could be government or something else and then I believe stakeholders like Medisell who are involved in the flow of goods and services to the, this project. And then any other company with regards to organizing, to, let's say to have a control, to have I believe that this is what the participants will be. 


Question 19.
Interviewer: So how would you during this example that you have provided of your the public private partnership with hospitals here in Rwanda. So how would you I qualify the collaboration that you had with your public, counterpart. How was that collaboration?  but was it still opened? Were you able to talk to each other without any issues and clearly, and presenting the issues that you, you are seeing?  


Respondent: We, we raise our issues. But they were not take into consideration. So if we are going to do a partnership, you know, like a placement, it's a PPP it's a kind of a small scale. PPP so if you enter into such a, an agreement, there has to be a security behind it. So if you say we have a contract for three years, at least you respect the contract for three years. so we have to ensure that the involvement, because you see, if you start the project, I have already done  all my investments. I put a lot of money and may be 50, a hundred thousand dollars hundred, $50,000. There are machines that they are even more expensive. So if I make this investment at day zero don't stop at day three months, because for your own reason again, I said, you prefer to use a different machine you understand.

Interviewer: Interesting.  so, and then based on what you have just explained, um, how can this experience that you have how can it be used to improve the next PPP arrangement? 

Respondent: Yes. From my experience, for example, for these laboratories, and it's not only one. 
Understand, if I am asked, for example, to make a placement of a machine in a PPP, okay. then I will have to ask for a security in place that what I expect and what do we agree? It will go on. And if it doesn't go on, if you break the contract, let's say there must be a fine some refund. You get your machine, but the machine is already used. I cannot sell it somewhere else. I can sell it as a second hand or whatever, but it, it lost its value. So, if you break the contract, you have to really take it, consideration the cost, and they have some refunds. We can say fine. I don't know if we can call it a fine or whatever, but that's, that's what I would be careful this time, you know.


Interviewer: so let see so I'm going to ask you questions about the interest of private partners in participating into PPP Yes. So if that private partners are called to participate in a PPP, like the ones that we are just explaining to you, so what would be your main questions? 

Respondent: Okay. For me as a company, when ask me to join you for a project okay. Um, as I said earlier, I am company for profit okay. So, when we do the PPP I will expect that we work in a probably a great way. Okay. Define the, what each party will participate in the period expectation from each, from each side and then respect the suggestions from a partner 
so you may be the controlling body John Hopkins, for example, or ministry of health, but respect what I'm telling you. Because maybe I have more experience into that section or my ideas if you apply my ideas, maybe to produce a better result. so, I expect that in a participation like this, it should be a healthy collaboration allowing both sites or all the sites to benefit if you understand what I mean. You benefit from provider reliable results to your, patients and I'm benefiting of at the end of the day, making some profits 

Interviewer: And then what will be your biggest incentives to participate in a PPP
Respondent:  stability and collaboration.

Interviewer: And what are the drawbacks? 


Respondent:  Sometimes, it depends on the models and on the concept, we are a private company here.  we have our expenses, our products, so maybe we have limitation in the money, which you can invest. So if you say, for example, now that you need two other machines, small machines for the small sites that they don't have in laboratory, we have small machines, Now,  in order for the project to work, you need the machines, then you need people to use and give service of  the machines,  train the operators
if it is a big project, maybe a private identity will not have the strength, financial strength to let's say, place the machines, but we can find a way of selling the machines are the best price and have the prices of the ages also lower. So, at the end of the day, it doesn't cost you much higher, but if you buy the machine, for example, I give you I stuck to this placement and the selling model. So, but if you buy the machine and you make the investment, you feel more the need to you, the machine If somebody brings the machine and puts it there many times, you don't appreciate the value of that machine.


Interviewer: So do you think that if we were going to do something big like this, what do you think about the capacities of private partners in country in regards to that? They have Capacity yes or no?

Respondent: You know, something that every organization builds up the capacity, according to   let's say turnover or according to its, needs the size can grow. You know? So if, for example you are asking me, I will give an example, although it may not be  , if you are asking me, for example, to run a laboratory now to run a laboratory, it means that I need people machines, material. Yeah. Then I'm moving into a different level.  I have here about 25 employees. I cannot run laboratories, but if let's say you say that, we don't want to manage the lab, you manage the lab. It means that every laboratory will meet a head count of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 people, depending on the size of the lab so this obviously it's you move to a different level. Yes. For a long time from here capacity can grow but again, to grow, that's what I said earlier. You need the stability and, you know, I cannot double my staff to accept, whatever is needed as input in the PPP and then next year, or next six months, these collapses you understand? Capacity currently is not here, but can grow given that you are assure that it's going to be a long partnership and stable. 


Question 20. 
Interviewer:  What would be the plans in place to support the public sector financing for the diagnostics? Can you just discuss some of the additional maybe resources and be used public resources that can be used to support diagnostic?
So do you think that there are some other sources that the government can tap in to fund lab diagnostics? 


Respondent: The lab diagnosis? I believe that the government has to look for more stability on the, laboratories on the personnel, in the laboratories and then there has to be a good planning for the deliveries to be done. So the laboratories can run without any deficiencies they have to evaluate if more machines are needed in certain places yeah. Okay.  I don't know. And also the money to be available for the purchase, but I think that is okay. I believe that since you have the funders being involved, I believe there will be no problem there. 


Question 21.
Interviewer: So, is there anything else that you would like to discuss in regards to PPP that we have not talked about up to now? 

Respondent: No what I do is a summary. What I will say is that be open with us in the private sector when you need the PPP because PPP it's a word thing that it was not here five years ago or 10 years ago. So, people may understand PPP in different ways so it's good to be very clear on what is expected in a PPP for a participant.

Interviewer: Thank you then. Thank you for your time and your experience that was shared.

Respondent: Thank you too, I hope it will be helpful to some extent.




