Question 1. 
Interviewer: The first question that we would like to ask is understanding your involvement in this PPP any involvement that you had in the design of African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda

Respondent:  So I was involved in different meetings when the project was submitted together with RBC different divisions to the departments planning on the clinical services. So I participated actively in those meetings for trying to analyze the contents of the project together with CHAI.


Question 2.
Interviewer:  the next question would like to know are you familiar with this project the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda. Are you are very familiar you been involved, as you said?

Respondent:  I was involved in that proposal of engaging, trying to manage the current laboratory network under PPP. So, we had many different proposals where we can choose one or not but before I didn't know that it was AHDP, it's only the proposal of engaging the government of Rwanda to manage the entire laboratory network across this facility.

Interviewer: Thank you so much. You said you had many proposals can you elaborate on that?

Respondent:  if I may recall, we might choose statical the current status we are operating in, we might choose the sample transportation. So the one who can win that the PPP can take over our sample transportation network. The third one was the co-management. So we bring an operator who can work with the government to co-manage, the current laboratory network in entire country. And the last one was the privatization, private taking over all entire network and being managed by a private company, a private NGO, and they can invoice some services to be paid by patients. So those were the four models. If I remember very well.


Question 3.
Interviewer: Thank you so much. I think we are going to come back to those as well. I was just going to ask
How were the negotiations, over the PPP? How do you think the negotiations were in terms of the selection of the facility in terms of procurement modes and contract?


Respondent:  Yeah, the negotiation pass through different phases.  There’s a business or a feasibility study on the desk, people trying to analyze that feasibility study, which can be submitted to subsequent institutions for analysis. If we take an example of Abbot, Abbott PPP agreement you have with the minister of health this feasibility study, the project went to the RDB. RDB has a peak committee. It's a committee chaired by ministry of finance with RDB and the contracting authority, which is the Ministry of health trying to analyze, and they can embrace the project, which is further, submitted to the cabinet and for Abbott the cabinet approved that the Abbott and the government of Rwanda can work together and do the feasibility study, during operation model or the government of Rwanda can agree to Abbott to work on together. And after the feasibility study was done, also proposing some models some deliberations, according to what have been done during the period Abbott has taken over with the government of Rwanda to run the laboratories in some hospitals.

Interviewer:  And how far was actually this one, this current proposal of AHDP. Do you think AHDP came after Abbott, or was it the result of the operations that as you said?

Respondent:  The project brought by CHAI because what I knew was CHAI approached the government of Rwanda, especially the Ministry of health it was if recall well maybe the second year of Abbott, and already the feasibility study was done of Abbott and were some discussions between Abbott and government of Rwanda  how can we make collaborations at  higher levels .


Question 4.
Interviewer:  Thank you so much, Doctor. Do you think there were any issues around the PPP design and if there were how those issues were resolved?


Respondent: There were many discussions and the pros and cons during discussions and what I can say, people were reluctant to take a way of choosing something, because, if you don't choose, you remain with statical the current status, but you remain either with three of choices, sample transportation, co-management and privatization and the issue is relying on changing the current status. Of course, for me personally, I agree that there is some issues and some challenges. We have some bottoms during the management of laboratories across the hospitals, the stock outs of lab reagents, the payment, and the issue of access because some patients, cannot have access to some tests. 
Sample transportation can be a solution. Co- Management can be a solution and a private management can be a solution, but taking, can I say this was very difficult for maybe so for some people to deliberate and take that decision.  I can't clarify very well because I didn't participate in the final deliberations but during the initial discussions, first meeting, second meeting and other meetings I participated in there are some, you can look at the face in discussions from participants on that particular note. 


Interviewer: If we have to do this again what do you think people should really insist and consider so that the risks during the discussions are minimized. Can you speak a little bit about the risk or elaborate a bit about the risk?  
What do you think should be considered before any negotiation?

Respondent:  there are two issues. The first one someone cannot take decision because is lacking some information maybe someone who's explaining the project. There are some information lacking which is not providing any details to push to choose and take that decision.
Secondly on risk, if you choose among the four, the three because statical is not a choice. You remain if you don’t choose. Among the three there is pros and cons to each model that they presented the private, when people were discussing the square the current tariff is highly subsidized and the subsidized tariff cannot make profit to someone who is managing that models. And our tariff is being done according to levels of service package. For example, you can't find immunology. You can't find some special tests at this hospital where some people are requiring, and you have some specialists who can prescribe those tests. And this make if, have a, a scope of services, which is much expanded. It means that even what you are getting from the course you are setting is very well. 
So people were fearing if we choose private, someone cannot gain similar to other PPPs agreement and the engagements you have, like and the others, for co-management, it similar like management you have with Abbott , because Abbott is co-managing the laboratory among, within  the 13 hospitals, referral and some selected hospitals. And we still have issues during that, within that model, because, it's Abbott who is fixing the cost and the increase according to the international market and the cost of transport they can increase to whatever time they want, and this, and also there is an issue of maintenance. According to those facilities the maintenance is very difficult until days we are calling the machine to be maintained until, and it is done within one month or two months and according to Abbott the payment is very late. So it needs a strong mechanism. You agree with a PPP, according to me, but you must put your strong mechanism of implementation. Do you have a steering committee, do you have a follow up committee? How do we sort out any issues that can arise in partnership in co-management?  for me the issue would be how do you manage the challenges from management, but people are insisting on issues in management, but don't try to think how can we build a strong mechanism of addressing an issue, because any partnership can have issues, but how would you address those issues? and sample transportation it's a model being done by RBC of course, taking over the needs, their mindset, and to change, and to be sure that their sample transportation is well addressed. 
We have at this hospital a package if we can't do some specialized services, they take some samples, they send to referral, for example, it is Byumba we sent to Ruhengeri they do test, and they report through digital platforms to all the initial facilities, that is a good model, but people are fearing how to enter that. It's a hesitance, which is not founded for me, which is not its business, but something that can be explored. So in a summary, there are two things, but on foundation of one thing if people are explained well the entire project, and they, we do risk matrix, and they do risk mitigation. People truly eliminate the risks and try to highlight some mitigation. It challenges during partnership. So, we put a steering committee we put a project manager who can send those requests, those challenges to program manager, if the company tries to use that program manager to coordinate. So there are many source many thinking that can be expanded. I know that to address those issues, but clearly if people know the entire project, reforms are very difficult to accommodate, but are needed to address some issues.

Interviewer: At the beginning you said there, were two issues, and there's a lack of information. Where do you think that information is not well shared? 

Respondent: The first one is people are not used to PPP I can't say it's an information entirely on the project. I can say even is government being involved in everything, even to purchase Paracetamol to purchase thermometer even the small things, the government can be, supplemented by private companies doing private business, it can be supported by private companies in partnership with the government. And in your co-management. So the more people are not used with the PPP. And I saw personally, when I arrived here, I was very exposed to many PPP projects. And I, opened my mind to know what the guidelines are, how the benefit fees, how do you evaluate the value for money?
How do you evaluate the projects so that exposure, to know the PPP, what is the PPP? What is the add? What are benefits from the PPP on side of the government on side of entire population, which will benefit for the PPP and how can we, the PPP in general with this project, what are our strategic plan? Again? This is, is very crucial because if our strategic plan is the cost of our strategic plan is 50 million us dollar and government can only get 20 or 10. Those 40millions will be supplemented if even grants, which are not yet available. Cause even those grants you are having are producing, if are reducing, we must supplement with other models. 
They, the emerging model is the PPP all over the world. So trying to imagine it, that way of management as manager is lacking. Maybe it's what I am guessing, but not on the project itself. It's even the understanding,  of the PPP and potential the laboratory project and of your problem you have in managing  and also the future plan and the future vision  you want to have  to manage the laboratories, because right now we are, for example we are aiming  to have the super specialty  . We are moving to kidney transplant next year.  we are moving to interventional cardiac. You must do troponin the other cardiac markers. We must have test both donors and receivers for transplant. And we want to do tests in Belgium to do tests in India. So engaging in the PPP agreement, the access, and also doing carry those things is it can be done. So if you have in mind, your strategic plan of services, you want to, to bring in the country and also the tests are applied so you can move to the agreement. 


Question 5.
Interviewer:  what do you think, who has been involved in the initial design of PPP especially looking into AHDP PPP?


Respondent:  what I know is CHAI, Ministry of health basically clinical services and planning and RBC, the national lab, specifically BIOS and which is overseeing the national lab, but those are three. I know

Interviewer: Did you have any involvement of a private partner, civil society involved in this initial? 

Respondent:  No it was at the beginning

Interviewer: I would like to ask, you know, how did the actors involved in the design process change between the initial design and the current situation?

Respondent: I don't think there's a change as I said, I didn't participate in a subsequent meeting, but I see nothing is moving.
I think for me, we might, if you have a project, must take some decision. Yes or no and I don't think I was informed if it is yes or no yet. Maybe I can find I went move that RBC. I didn't follow up the subsequent, the discussions and others, but preliminary discussions were, it was very clear. Maybe it difficult to, can we change now? Can we maintain what we have at least we get out of this pandemic, so, yeah. And see after. So I can't really tell right now what is the direction? 

Interviewer: How about do you have any, would you call anyone here as a champion for supporting PPP?

Respondent: It's very difficult, but as far as ministry is very concerned. We are at policy level, we receive many PPPs personally and the chief technical advisor who analyze   there's many people who are, who want to build the hospitals, but they want to partner with the government. Is it a land required? We analyze to see if we can offer the land. We make a feasibility study. Personally, we last time made PPP for health post to manage 193 health post and we choose a procurement process. We had one interest, called for proposal, the proposal was submitted to RDB for next approval. So at policy level, we receive many and we analyze.


Interviewer: Thank you so much. Do you think there's any actor, you know, look at the institution, who would oppose, the PPP, especially if you refer to AHDP one?


Respondent: I don't think there is one you see, there are three choices it's yes or no, or between I can say I can be on side of yes. Because, if you look at the resource mobilization are decreasing from grants and the government cannot take loans. Many are reluctant and have hesitance, if it has some consequences and being accountable. So many are in that category as you said. 

Question 6.
Interviewer: So if you had a PPP, who do you think or who, or which institution would have been ultimately responsible for improving the PPP design?


Respondent: It is RDB Yeah, and normally many people passes to the first step. They start by RDB. Yeah. And the RDB tries to engage the custodian ministry in but the others who prefer to go directly because they know this is the health sector. I go to the health, this is the environment, I will go to the environment? This is sport. It's like, want to be the stadium. It's they to the sport, if understand the project, they can support me to bring to the RDB. But, RDB tries to understand and to work together and to the one who wants to move the PPP and they have the PPP analyst or the one who is only the PPP and is cabinet point.


Interviewer: How do you think this project, when do you think that they use the RDB procedure or they first come to ministry and they haven't checked with RDB? What happens here for the AHDP?

Respondent:  I don't recall very well, but maybe they engaged that RDB, but I can't clearly know. Yeah. But I entered into the discussions already CHAI their friends of ours and they work together. They first told us many things telling me the projects and how can we facilitate the discussions, but if I remember well the RDB was involved.


Question 7.
Interviewer: What options were, or are still being considered when designing the model, this AHDP model?
You talked about at the beginning, we had the sample transportation, co-management. Is there any option or any model that you are considering this time around? 


Respondent: For me, the co-management is very good. I can't think other model apart the four proposed in that project. But this the preferred one, the co-management is very good. Because now you work together, you use the existing infrastructure. It's something, it's a house.  it's the equipment. Maybe you can add more, but co-management is very good. And I can ask the payment from the insurers and they give you what I owe to you as payment. So the co- management is can be very good it's the best. Yeah

Interviewer:  so just quickly do you think for the co-management, we need different modalities, different design for example, contracting options will be, or regulatory consideration would be different.

Respondent: The all models need to pass through the same state, but the changes we have, we have two options. The first one is the PPP without the procurement, the PPP without procurement has some conditions, is it for national security? Is it for national interest? is this company the only one in this sector or this services that some conditions in the PPP guideline, if that one is not meeting those conditions. So you go to the for procurement process, which passes through the two steps I mentioned earlier, the expression of interest. people are send you the interest you analyze and those selected,  you ask them the proposals  you first  the one you recommend  to RDB, the RDB  the peak that committee they ask you some questions and if they embrace that one they submit to  the cabinet for approval. If the cabinet approves, you make an argument those are similar steps for each model you can choose.


Question 8.  
Interviewer: How do you think how appropriate is the design of AHDP PPP to the local context? 

Respondent: There are two things. The first one we have a good universal coverage, which is, based on community based health insurances but what we can know is the contribution from population is not too much. And their payment are not much there are not much to address even the cost may be of some services. So the reason why the services are highly subsidized the consultations, the acts and the procedures. So someone who can invest in laboratory. And it is according also the Abbott, Abbott concluded that any model that they propose cannot work. Yeah. According to their Feasibility study. So they dig deeper, see that, it is very difficult to get some profits in each model that they're proposing. 
So, this is before AHDP but when we try to imitate management, we have like if you try to make a transportation or someone, can you invest private if you invest in private, we need some private tariff. And then, if you, for example, you go to the consultation in public hospitals, it's like $1, but if you go to the private hospitals, it's $5. Because not subsidized there in public, we remove the cost of human resources, the cost of infrastructure. We give some equipment and we remove those costs. The cost of services remains available. So investing in public services, we have already some, the tariff is reflected the highly subsidized, services. Some people don't think on that one. And, it is very difficult to get some money from that one.  Yeah. Someone who can invest must do, the analysis, financial analysis very well. And what are tests being performed at this hospitals? How do they get, do they get some profits? What are tests from the referral hospitals? How can I get, some profits? So and they do financial analysis and see if they can make profit of course we can make profit, but it is highly subsidized.


Interviewer: So how would you recommend a process to have a very deep buying for key stakeholders? For example, what would you recommend to international funders? Here? We are looking at someone like BMG, some station, like BMG for your investment bank.

Respondent:  I do recommend if you can, as I said, you can have people can be okay. And you can have people that are between but how can we make sure those people are hesitant. Make a pilot can we make a pilot? And at then at the end of pilot, six months or one month one year we have a study which can show that model is working that model can be sustainable. that model has these challenges, A, B, C, D, but those challenges are minimal and can be addressed these ways. So that can be scientific and can assure everyone who can be hesitant to implement the, the project Yeah. Okay.
I recommend that before going into the real PPP, we have to do some piloting. We showcase, then we go to the PPP, especially for those who are in between.


Interviewer: You know, you just say piloting is one of them. What else do you think need to be considered? If we have another opportunity to do the PPP with lab services?

Respondent: It's very difficult. Some people are tend to say, can we take over the, can we give work networks to one individual? How secure we are if something went wrong will go wrong. so again, everything can be put into agreement. How do you assure everyone that you are on safe side and any challenges you can anticipate? So, again, for me, it comes again on table of analysis. You analyze the challenges you anticipate and you brainstorm, how can we address those challenges? How can mitigate those risks? on both sides, because even the company engaging in PPP can have many problems, exactly. To have many works coming here to support us, or have these issues. And we try to, to support them in one way or other. So this can be anticipated by both sites.

Interviewer: And you think that this was not well done, considering that, you know, understanding the old stakeholders mapping and understanding who bringing the table how do you see that should be done?

Respondent:  It was done. And I remember the proposal piloting was brought on the table and the people said the government is no longer do the piloting. We do things. They automatically the high level offices are asking us don't pilot, because you must analyze and be sure I'm okay. You do things I'm not okay I can't do things. So it's again what can I say what is this project? Is it on which level can I explain and explain to above level because above me, there is another level that level, there's another level. So, as technician, the head of department, maybe I cannot understand, I can have fear to take some decision, but we try to explain to the, my supervisors, my bosses, they explain the projects and they take over those risks. Because many people are sharing this and take, if we do reforms, any reforms must have the consequences, of course, but we do reforms those consequences, those challenges, and we mitigate in this way. So that kind of proposal, I might say, I see try to involve the higher leadership. I know that there is one meeting chaired by the minister, but maybe one is not enough. Cause the minister has many agenda. But that doesn't know what the fruit from the discussions and meetings is. how did you, where were you stuck? Why are you stuck there? is it reasonable? So I try to think in that box.


Question 9.
Interviewer:  How would an ideal PPP design, accommodate the needs of priority population? What is the best PPP in this one?


Respondent: As I say, the all four models of this PPP had pros and cons. If you look at  the sample transportation, for example  I try to imagine when  I was director general of the hospital, I have a moral pregnancy for example, I must do ALF  for mother every day or some days, according to the guidelines . But that Alfa fetoprotein is not allowed at the level of District hospital. Exactly. But you have sample transportation, you can, you can transport that Blood or that sample from Byumba hospital to Ruhengeri hospital, which has a tariff and capacity and train or screen the personnel to those and to do testing of that ALF and because we have a digital platform you analyze, and that patient can even pay through digital, through mobile and send the proof. I have paid on my mobile. These are proof and you send samples and they can even give you the results through the phone numbers. So you increase access to the services. You use the existing referral process. You don't disturb anything. And that poor people already who can be transferred to private or to the referral can get services without expensive costs, like traveling, the staying at the referral hospital. 
So when I try to imagine and to analyze, the sample transportation would bring those benefits to the, to the population of course it needs the sophisticated manner and the bringing network of sample transportation. And I'm trying to increase and to add adapt the markup of those transport cost to the population, but it can respond to the real need locally without travel and moving   from the patients. So already those four, especially the three, which is beyond the static.  has any advantages of addressing  the local needs and  the population, if it is private,  can even go home and draw some samples and test and give you some result. So of course it costs and do some payment. 


Question 10.
Interviewer:  How would the PPP design address key considerations to improve access of laboratory diagnostics? 


Respondent: It can use also the existing standards because you have standards. What is the turnaround time, how the privacy of results. So already the standards in place for hospitals and also for laboratory  themselves incorporating the into agreement with the government Rwanda the Ministry  of health, and also the follow up with the implementations of those  which  incorporated those standards,  can make sure that it is being done.


Question 11.
Interviewer: What factors do you think changed the discussion around the PPP? And how do you think separate question COVID would or affect the decision on the PPP?


Respondent: For me I can't say that COVID, has affected much the health sector because it increases the workload. The maybe there are some days and others, but in terms of profitability and the usual services, it is not like the other private sector, which will close. We remember some service were closed recently during entire without working, but  the hospital were open and people, of course, people doesn't have money to pay, like they used to have. so I can't say that COVID changed a lot  in decision making and it can also a good open opportunity to up and cause the future pandemic  can come. We need PCR in many centers in the future because we see if this an epidemic and a pandemic, uh, it is very easy to have a PCR rather than rapid test, which passes through the process of approval and the approval even WHO pre-qualification, national qualification, but the PCR is very rapid and to be used very easy to be adapted during pandemic and the epidemic.
So accommodating new technology, new mindset, new PPP models, can even expand and invest in your resources to have.  And you have many PPP like Lancet which are collaborating with Gihundwe which are collaborating with Gisenyi near Congo borders. It's one of the model which can be, which can work and address some specialty services.
They're already in hospitals. They have some room hospital. And if you order, for example, some immunology tests, other tests before the dialysis, because those centers are having dialysis center so people can go and pay out of pocket. Of course, they will be out, out pocket catastrophe of expenditure   But at least people cannot travel from Gisenyi to in Kigali to test themselves, but they have access.



Question 12.
Interviewer:  I was just going to ask for example, if AHDP is providing technical support and facilitating financing for these people, how would the availability of this support affect the PPP design? 


Respondent: This can change.  but the issue is sustainability, of course, the model can be good but how sustainable it can be, how long, can we work together? And many people can look at the, the way of building the sustainability, for example you can bring the machine, which has a cost of nine 50 million, Rwandan Francs, hundred million Rwandan  Francs,  which can equal to  those subsidies you want to adopt. So there are many things people can look at and say how can we finance this in a sustainable way and to cover the, what we are thinking as good.

Interviewer: Do you think that there's a way that you can do PPP without looking at the financial instruments or PPP must have financial instrument?

Respondent:  It must. And they must even submit the excel sheet, analyzing the what is  called capital expenditure  And how do  if it is capital expenditure, how do you have apex? So, the many expenditures that they put in tax and further subject to be analyzed by financial specialist in RDB and apex stand I can look at it, but they are Capex and apex 

Interviewer:  How would you recommend AHDP technical support being used to address any of the gaps that you said weaknesses in capacity among his stakeholders?

Respondent: As I said maybe issues were in PPP understanding, the PPP guidelines and the roles, what are benefits. So trying to engage that RDB to explain to the, to line ministry and the stuff, but to understand that the PPP guidelines and the benefits, also the ministry of finance. We with the many requests, we want those money, but they get money from the collection of taxes. Exactly. If the business are not going well, you remain if a hospital, which you are not yet expanded or innovated. So the only way is someone who can come partner with the government and agree with the government can take some shoe, a money, but in over the years, not in one time. Kind of a loan with very low interest over time.


Question 13.
Interviewer: How supportive is the existing policy legal or regulatory framework to PPPs that we have? Do you have a lot of resistance in the policy makers, or do we have different ways of overcoming those resistance? How flexible is the PPP to changes in the government priorities?


Respondent: The legal tools and frameworks are there and the well designed and the even the structures. I remember I know even at RDB, cause they are custodian, they have a department which is dealing, with and give someone who's want to go into PPP, but if you work with the government and assign the agreement  they have another department, which called aftercare.  So they have after aftercare, any problem and issues arising from aftercare, they are brought in and facilitate the discussions. I can give you an example these drones. 
So the discussions we are having right now are, are being facilitated by aftercare department, which you were not there during the negotiation, but they are there to facilitate the company. Even to expand, to extend to sort out some issues, which can arise in PPP agreement so the structures, the roles, the policies, the guidelines are you to the PPP, but we need an awareness to police makers to understand. And even when you are budgeting, when you are planning, you can even plan, I read hospital, get, but between bracket under PPP,  by maybe some equipment, it will be a workshop for maintenance  of medical equipment, but this will be done under PPP and you put  your procurement plan those procedures. So if it is, you have many sessions of awareness’s it can help, can affect the positively the police makers. 


Question 14.
Interviewer:  And you talked about the Abbott examples and you also talk about your experience as a, as a District hospital manager. So how were you involved in the past experience in the PPP? or even here as a in charge of quality head of department?


Respondent: Before I was not involved at the, at, in referral hospital, I saw only the agreement and there could be the implementer. But here at the ministry, I’m involved, not principally , but as also a member of ongoing discussions, discussing with Abbott the challenges during implementation cause hospitals, which I implementing are under my coordination. So try to capture the issues from hospital and to correlate with those from Abbott and to find some solutions. Yeah.


Interviewer: And how trusting collaborative was the relationship, or is the relationship between the public and private sector in this one?

Respondent: I think it's very good, because if you tell truly, what you are thinking of the partner private, and also they can tell you through they think of the improvements can be done. I think the trust is very good. And through discussions through the different meetings you are conducting can tell you   a personal experience. We have a PPP with health post under what we call the OFH one family health under the, you have many meetings with them because, any issues rising, you must sit down and sort out. And, because in the PPP a there's a third party, there's a PPP, an operator. And also, someone who accompany and those who are using services and also a regulator, which can be maybe So, as Ministry of health we must engage those two the company, which is engaged in PPP. And also those who are using those services from that company of course there are some issues, must be brought on and to discuss and sort out.


Question 15.
Interviewer: What has been any historic investment and interest from government in laboratory diagnostics?  Or do you think it's align with the government priorities?  


Respondent: Yeah, The government priorities also, it includes engaging   private sector. And I remember we submitted to RDB recently what we call private sector engagement. Yeah. We, because we had many calls from private companies, uh, to know the interest from the ministry, what are interests, what areas can we  finance, but not privately but with your support with  the partnerships and the laboratory was among the key areas we  want to partner  with the private companies in PPP . Yeah.

Interviewer: Do you think there will be  for example, as you submitted the document to RDB, do you think you need to improve or work on  how the health work related to those diagnostic system  would be able to actually accommodate all the new improvement? 
do you think that you need new trainings, new Cadre or new post?

Respondent:  The document itself cannot change anything, to bind the ministry of health and RDB. And they clarify without the many consultations, you have interest in cancer, you have interest in I laboratory. Do you have interest in oxygen implants?  So it speaks itself. The interest from the ministry but, it needs other subsequent tools and subsequent ways of increasing the awareness. Like those training. You mentioned, many post things, and some people were thinking, can we make a position, even if can be temporarily to the ministry on private sector engagement? can you have a PPP honor at the ministry, can you have at  least someone who can come at the ministry knows who can facilitate me, who is custodian who can understand  very well from first page to last page of PPP guidelines and who knows even the interest from the ministry  . So those are many suggestions, many suggest of course, needs the other institutions to be take over. And they agree if he can have someone, but it can facilitate, and he or she can have even an annual plan. It's only be not engaging with private sector, also awareness among policy makers, and awareness among users. But maybe its many ideas out that maybe can be make, make it real in the future. 


Question 16. 
Interviewer:  So, this is the list of people that would like to, we are actually planning to interview do you think we miss any, we would like to see any important stakeholder in that show card


Respondent: RBC, MOH in planning, I think they were involved. RBC the director of lab, CHAI we were planning with the former country director and she accepted as well I think others, I don't know their levels of involvement, BMC, BOOFMAR, Lancet. And, but the crucial are RBC and us and also CHAI.


Interviewer: Thank you so much for those, do you think there will be an incentive to participate in the PPP you know, the ones that you suggest


Respondent: Incentives, monetary are not good. To make a friendly climate maybe is it a workshop? Maybe people can understand have a time not bound with because I can, before the meetings were even the online and virtual you don't know the level of involvement at virtual meeting. True. Are they focused? Do they read are they prepared? Did they know the content? So are they able to ask some questions? So those are kind of, if I try to be neutral and to put on another side. What can I do in future


Question 17.
Interviewer: That's correct. Thank you so much Doctor whose interests are hurt or helped by laboratory diagnostic happening in public versus the private sector


Respondent:  I don't know. I don't think there is no one only the hesitance, because, you can think of, you can shake when you have some the administrative ministerial level, our aim is something can improve.  Some people,  are not appreciating  the services of laboratory if to we go to the appreciation level of RDB they are among services are not appreciated ambulance too, the services of laboratory drugs, accessibility. We know that level. And, and if we did that change last year with RMS I mean PPD again, reform will be needed a different way to address   the access to the test and laboratory. So maybe hospitals, are getting revenue I cannot lie I was the hospital manager. and you can buy at cost of X and you get five X five times and four times. For example, if I tell you, for example, for a hepatitis test, they have more, more profits, pregnancy test, they have profit more profits. May be, but this is my guess.

Interviewer: Yeah. So, so probably at the level of the, especially at the health facility,

Respondent:  Maybe they can be hesitant yeah. Because they get something from it.


Interviewer: Okay. I see. And, and that's where, or you think that there may be potential threatened to PPP or contracting arrangement because that's where the hospital gets.  Some support. 
Yeah. At the central level, do you see any threatening or fearing of partnering in this venture?

Interviewer: The fear, again, for me the ignorance is very difficult. And maybe you can have fear because you doesn't understand the project and you don't want to take risk. And sometimes in any projects it's boundary the risks. Yeah. And some people fearing to take risk, Due to a lot of fear. 


Question 18.
Interviewer: Thank you so much. And we are almost there. So do, do you think there were any BMGF, CHAI and European investment Bank? That influence level of PPP dynamics here in country?

Respondent: I'm not aware of that.

Interviewer: And the negotiation between CHAI and any of these BMG and European Investment Bank   the government were not involved?

Respondent: Yeah. Maybe at level of the ministers and all, but we were approached by CHAI try to explain the project. But we don't know about that. 


Question 19.
Interviewer: Thank you so much. So you said that private partner didn't really were not involved when you started the negotiation with CHAI. What will you anticipate as a main question from private partner?


Respondent:  the private partners it's their spirit they want to do their things on their own maybe they see that our public sector is very risky, very difficult to take some investment. The payment process from RSSB can take an average of 90 days right now. before it was 180 can I now wait for those days to be reimbursed. So, it could be those scenarios and those questions we may see, and they, of course, every time say, how can we get capital to inject in those PPP? And do we have some special treatment, like loan with reduced interest, do you have, the guarantee?


Interviewer: Okay. Thank you so much. And you think, first of all, they have capacity, if this was an open option?

Respondent: Yeah they have. You look at, maybe there are some people investing in big hospital are bringing many equipment, they have equipment, and someone can buy a city scan themselves. So they, they have heavy investment so it is very easy to be open. And they also we because of the friendly environment and the business model of the country we are seeing many foreign investors cannot even right to the Rwandan investors. I think it comes something that can be even attract foreigners to invest in.

Interviewer: Okay. Do you have any idea of who could be the potential, a private partner in this say starting by the country?

Respondent: We only have Lancet as someone who is specialize in laboratory, others are opening up the clinic, but also adopt the laboratory. And BMC also had that unique laboratory model, but added some clinical services there maybe laboratory can be interested as some something that is private model.


Question 20.
Interviewer: Thank you so much. I know that we've been taking, almost one hour and 15 minutes.  
What do you think would be the plan in place to support public sector financing of Diagnostic in future? What do you think would be the potential of source of funding to continuing supporting the lab services in country?


Respondent: Grants are not sustainable.  Loans from bank is always  the only guarantee, but the only fear is the interest rate, which is very high so I suggest maybe if it is a loan from bank  but with law interest it can attract private investors.

Interviewer:  Do you see any, any support in terms of coming from the government let’s say, for example, we are seeing that the lab system are being improved. Do you think the government has the room to inject more funds by itself?


Respondent: It's very difficult and kind of PPP If the government has the infrastructure, the buildings  the equipment, and the much demands from other future investment from the government, building other hospitals,  scale up the already services to l specialty  it can be done, but with many priorities we have, and other priorities  put on hold , if you have someone who can sustain the lab it can be very good for us and look at the other areas to invest.

Interviewer: That's really very interesting. And I think you said it work it's to expand on the existing, not government to start in new. Yeah. That's what you kept on saying that PPP could be one, one way as, as many others learn and stuff. And thank you so much, Dr. Thank you. I really appreciate. And before would like to ask if you have any question for us,
Respondent: My question is,  did I contribute a lot, because before  I wanted to tell Tunga that I will not contribute because I don't have enough information. I skipped some meetings cause of different reasons.

Interviewer: Thank you so much Dr.  I think you gave us a really rich information and we really appreciate, and what we promise as well, once we have, even the draft report will give you back, uh, what we have collected based also on the recommendation of the list of people that you think we should have will, will definitely think that, uh, the information that of us is going to be very capital. Okay. Especially not only for a position, but also your experience. Sure. Thank you so much for your time and really, really, really on behalf of the team, you appreciate your time. Thank you for your ideas. 
