Question 1. 
Interviewer: And starting, just would like to know how your involvement in the PPP process under this project is?


Respondent: My role in the PPP process, started I think one year ago during the COVID pandemic, I think in 2020 May_ June when CHAI came to see the minister and then Minister Called me and the team we went there to the meeting and then the country director of CHAI introduced this platform or the process to the minister, So the Minister tasked us to work on it. So what we did, it was, first of all we established the steering committee. With clear term of reference with all stakeholders which I will share with you. Okay. We developed it together with CHAI but also colleague from RBC lab division so from there have been already some work ongoing by that time, there was issue of completing the data collection which we did. We supported them to give them the introduction letter. We give them those data through HMIS opening data we have, there was a formal appointment by the minister to the Steering committee and after the appointment, the initial meeting workshop of five days and PS was the chair of the Senate committee. It was appointed chair of committee. So there have been the first workshop and our team was there. We worked with them there were different people from hospital, private sector, RDB, university of Rwanda of course with ENABEL, USAID but those are partners. It was quite a very good team. Composed of all stakeholders. 


Interviewer: Oh, wow. Steering committee how many people in the steering committee? 


Respondent:  I think it was around 20, I'll give you the composition, but also I, can share with you the reports that they did, the workshop were in Musanze. I think that was July they had a workshop and they discussed a lot that time, there was the brief that I get for the team, those  kind of confusion, people, some people say that you know, you are going to bring one private sector  to have a monopoly.  It will not be possible how this is complementally to, what Abbott and Roche they're doing. I see, which was quite different because I think there was a kind of we had to explain, to make people understand why this, I mean, the contribution of this initiative the ongoing initiative, this initiative came not only not to remove other initiatives but it was quite of somehow see how we can get more, can be more efficient the way we manage our lab we liked the idea, that's why we even continued to push it. And at that time there was a big feasibility study that was shared. I mean, after that, there was input from the steering committee, there was initial reports, and then the steering committee discussion, they approved the document, the document was shared in August  . 
But at that time, only, I think ENABEL provided comment at that time. So we had again to sit and try to see how we can make use of this issue, initiative, doing business. So we continued to discuss and try to explain even internally here in the ministry of health, but also other people are busy, but also other stakeholders. So to understand what this tradition added value of these initiatives and we had some initial information about what's about, as you mentioned, the gate foundation, which is very good for us, because it was supposed to help us to improve the way we are managing our lab. So we then at that time  we went again to review the document feasibility study we had those and then have at least three model that we present that time. 
The proposed model that's PPP, there was one for transportation, another PPP, lab co-management, another full management by the private operator of hospital. So we even agreed by to do it by phases where we start with transportation because that's where we have issues. So, our role, as far as private sector engagement and our role of just helping a lab mean to see how we can finalize this. And then we have meeting between us and RBC technically and reach out as a process and that those three scenario so in brief, our role was just to coordinate technically the work which we did up to the finalization of the feasibility study. I see the rest was to be approved in leadership, but we also presented to all management RBC also presented to the DVG and the team also present to the ministry here, the leader, the ministry, and there was decision to put it on hold because of the results, rather ongoing with other initiatives within RBC that they proposed that to put it on hold for at least one year. 
So that's what we did. And we stop there. The feasibility study is  there probably it'll be used after one year of course it has to be updated , but  I still believe that  it'll be resumed  and after  one year, I still believe sample transportation should come first cause we still  have some issues. I still believe we have a room with the issue that we have seen in the system yeah.


Question 3. 
Interviewer: What was the process of negotiation over PPP how did the process vary by topic?
So in that time we had a lab, the current leadership was involved or it was the formal leadership 


Respondent:  At that time, like June when started lab leadership was involved the current one and the previous. I remember even when we had the meeting preparing the Steering committee workshop, the former leader of Lab is the one who proposed to have sample transportation, which I liked sincerely speaking, personally liked that idea and proposed that let start with sample transportation. That's why we have problems rather than going for full management or PPPs hospital. And we took that idea, even the committee that was discussed, even though the workshop it was quite of because it was a mixture of people some of them were what's the first time to be introduced to a, that's why they bring all those, you know, monopoly versus their discussion shifts you know, it's not good to have one person to manage your lab. 
So we pursue that idea. And then when we make it to the team of CHAI so let's start with sample transportation let's do function with other ideas. And then we pursue that with introducing to the new team, we had met the lab team and the clinic of service and we had online, also physical meeting. We reach other time when lab team met with a team of CHAI and they say that they're doing a lot things about Diagnostic Network Optimization (DNO) which is quite different.
With from what we did with this one, I think at that point they managed to conclude and had at least, how to communicate properly to the partner. It is quite frustrated. And they told us they don't know if money, have to be relocated because they also have AHDP money for the implementation, so we didn't have money to conclude. So, but the vision was we finalize the feasibility study. We submitted to RDB and had a kind of review PPP steering committee. We agree. We launch the tender and see who's going to beat and also win the tender. And then we start the process. That was just for sample transportation and see, remember that the meeting that we had that time at the ministry. The idea to finalize it, but of course, since RBC, the one implementing gave objection which is quite understandable, the one preventing, they asked to give them one year.


Interviewer: And that was communicated to CHAI that will hold on for one year? 


Respondent:  Yes. Immediately. Technically we communicate not officially to CHAI. And I think also other meeting between the leadership of CHAI here with the country director of CHAI, she had introduction, this was a visit to minister after being appointed. I was there in the meeting and Minister told them that the process has been put on hold for one year probably end of next year.


Interviewer:  Thank you so much. And this process was put in hold because of there was a DNO that was put in place to support?

Respondent:  Yeah. There are two things. They mentioned two things they mentioned the DNO but also they mentioned another thing. They say that they're going to strengthen the regional labs, you see the blood NCBT the regional office they're going to strengthen those regional and maybe some need to be renovated, but put some lab tests mean working with the nearby hospital. There is no machine in the hospital to put in those NCBT office.


So, I think it'll be very difficult because if you allow maybe going deeply, with sample transportation, if we have in the system, that's I talked on the perspective of the service delivery. The problem is when it comes to this expensive test, let me give you an example. Now we are deploying specialist in hospitals who are being deployed even now at provincial and referral hospitals, which are not operating at the maximum.  why, because diagnostic capacity.
I remember last year we had four pathologies graduating from university of Rwanda, even now for your information we tell the University not to continue producing pathologists, put on hold for two years. 


Interviewer: Oh, really?  Why? 


Respondent: Because we don't have where to deploy them. I see. It's not because there is no demand, but this because of lack of infrastructure, but also bottlenecks in term of service delivery. So one way of even now we have all the hospital has declined. We don't have backend positions. We don’t know how we had to put them. Are we going to put them say, go and be freelancer and look for yourself. You know, yet you have contract we feel frustrated somehow. That's it's a poor planning for our side. 
I mean tests for this pathology services, that's CHUK around 4,000, which is 30% of the capacity. 
And we went even there. We found that if they, you give you specimen, they'll give you result after six months, probably   you have been died. I still very fortunate.  Why you think that?  Yes. I told them and let's see, what are the problem? Make this, you know what we found? We found that patients the, I mean surgeon, but also doctors are not, are no longer taking biopsy wide. See if I take this biopsy, it's not done in this district hospital I have to give to the patient and the patient has to travel. They give sample to the patient they put in the formalin and then tell the patient to go to CHUK and perhaps patient do not have money to travel and they can even stay home with the sample and then storage of sample will be difficult and some can discard it.  And sometimes reaching at the hospital the specimen to be tested RSSB can pay for that patient unless the patient have a valid transfer note of one month because those people are using Mutuel 
I mean the samples, that's what for the super specialty, but for normal specialty mean general specialty told us. So let's ask Kanombe even samples to 200 to thousand and 500, which is a crazy some on our workload, pathologists are just sitting. We're not using them at the maximum. So how can we, that's why I support that idea. How can we put in place a transport system?  if someone, the doctor feel comfortable that even though I can't do it here, but there is a sample system that can take this sample to a designated lab where people can get even like. This is why we thought of how can we put an effective system? So people don't feel that I have to take myself. But other tests are being done like malaria, the normal full blood count, GOT, GPT a lot. When it comes to biopsy there is still a problem and the cancer cases are still increasing.
 So we are now introducing this Invasive surgery, the cardiology intervention if you don't, you have to anticipate you don't have a very good lab, the systemic transporter where it's really our need so we agreed that will be having people transferring sample to fully utilize equipment and surgeons so that at least the patient get service this would remove a delay diagnostic outcome as well as the delaying of the results some patient dies before even getting results.
That's why I've seen it's opportunity for us if private can help us on that issue.  That's why we push sample transportation. And, because we have a lot government can't do everything. That's true. We can't, we should have accepted. We are raising this problem to have a well lab and establish well transport system an effective transport of sample ,  a platform so that the patient can access their results easily without travel and this would save patients, we need to put some guidelines for a lab this is a big opportunity for private to partner with the government


Question 4.
Interviewer:  What do you think were the issues to implement the design, the PPP design to be designed and how, how these issues were discussed and resolved? 
And what do you think were the issues that need to be considered while implementing PPP in lab systems if AHDP comes after one year?


Respondent: Yeah, my personal view. Not the minister so I'll be frank with you I don't think what will do in this in one year will make a difference to change this option of having the PPP for lab. I mean, for sample transportation, why it's because we know what we are doing and how we do things. So number one it's I think we need we should sit together and see, I mean, we probably that one year that we had agreed on, I mean, that has been decided if we could have a time to discuss what are the advantages and disadvantages cause I'm seeing it, that not helping so much, the people even though so but I understand because most of the time government fear to engage to the private.
The private. And they found that they do what they want. But I still believe that the private can make big contribution. This why in Rwanda what I've seen, for example, let me you have some good example. I mentioned COVID   which is quite very good when we engage the private sector, but the government continue to have that provide that leadership coordination and that's why COVID management was successful. Everyone is praising Rwanda cause of the COVID management. Yeah. but because we put private sector, but private sector with clear guideline and proper monitoring system. We have been put in place to ensure that does mean that, but if also we could, you know, even sit together and see.
The benefit of this and see what's our role to do, I'll give you an example. I've been interacting with private sector and when talk to RDB, RDB sometimes when, even that's the identification of boundaries ministry you are tasked to do this and to RDB as well. RDB role is just sector identify a potential partner private, but when it comes to monitoring, it's your role, as institution, sector, what about the investment, investment incentive what's supposed to do, and then they leave it to the sector. Once the private but it's up to the sector to sit and monitor on a regular basis. So that's why I'm saying that if you could get together and discuss what's need to be done, what are we talking about? Sample transportation? What are the benefit we could have made, good progress but I don't think there's too much in one year that only, I mean, change the game, you know? And, this decision, I mean, sample transportation changing, I don't think I think it'll, we need to sit together and understand probably not well understood. 
That's why I'm saying but it then should be understandable properly. I mean, all of us have a kind of consensus about what need to be done. So I think private sector will do the job but, when the after one year my worry is after that one year that's I think on the time of the worry people continue to suffer no business as usual.  Which is a leadership all the time. Tell us that you guys usually change the business as usual. So people will continue to suffer. That's why we are aiming. I mean, having a good sample transportation, if you have good sample transportation, there is a lot of, a lot of a meet needs in term of diagnostic. That's align in the community. I think that's the first sequence now. I think what got calculate enough for money it's a loss. Yeah.
Number two, you also will go continue to, I mean the people services delivery, the people not be good. That’s why all the time you know, that how many people are accessing private yeah. So need some specialized areas and proper system and again we need to think again about the assess of the cost of keeping this project in terms of money, what are going to gain ,what are going to lose? We need to revisit the decision.


Interviewer: What do you think would be done to solve those issues for the government to engage?


Respondent: I think we need to do a lot of advocacy to bring more leadership, European investment bank, you see European investment bank. They have already give us money for the lab with the ministry finance the loan has been signed. So if they found that Rwanda is more engaging in more projects. I think they will also continue to invest and they're going to support us that's one of the things I leave it to leadership. The district hospital is a first contact of the patient If they found that they have proper sample transportation, the lab would be busy. So the big lab is going to be there. With a well and effective sample transportation and this really a good time to do it. We will keep on advocating to see if this can work, but also I'm seeing a lot of opportunity if the banks can offer loans to the low interest rate too.


Question 5.
Interviewer: Thank you so much Dr. Who do you think has been involved in the initial design of the PPP? 


Respondent:  MOH, MOF, private sector like CDC, ENABEL, USAID those were working for supporting project engagement and CHAI also was involved.


Interviewer:  And how about civil society? Did the civil society involved?

Respondent: No they didn’t involve, PSF involved as private partners they gave us someone. 

Interviewer: I would like just to ask one quick question do you think we had champions for PPP for this AHDP? Who are these champions

Respondent: (laughing) I will align this with the leadership you don't have champions leadership champions. So leadership is minister of health first. They was one pushing it, even though they put it on hold, but it's the ministry of health. Yeah. The ministry I see. But on, I think on personal note at that time it was not perceived, it pushed by CHAI. Yeah. But when the conversation, I mean, that was the beginning, but when the evolving, it was very clear we found that there was kind of the government want to do it you remember the discussion we had yeah.


Interviewer: And how about do you have any actor trying to oppose it though the PPP on AHDP? 


Respondent:  No I won't say that, there is oppose instead I think it's a progressive understanding So it's people were not in the same level of understanding the project, maybe what we want to do. What are the benefits, but also looking ahead and see what are we losing? What are we gaining?

Question 7.
Interviewer:  what options were, or still being considered when designing the model? 

Respondent: I think for this one, as I mentioned earlier two options, we need to sit together and discuss and revisit the decision and those details I stated above.

Question 8.
Interviewer:  Do you think how appropriate is the design of AHDP PPP to local context? 


Respondent: I'm not a politician but I used to follow speeches or the leadership. So the, let's say  the perspective of  our leader will say every time  you see that private sector is a key actor.  So he always say that, you know, there is a huge cost of not taking the right decision at the right moment. It's a huge cost that let's say the issues that we have now, the issues now, probably not yet, you know, we are still it's, COVID new variant. We're still busy, but out there, people need services in a compressive manner. I've done good and very well scaling up, you know, services actually, but all those things, but in time of timely service, and also to see citizen satisfaction rates to the health services is still very low, very low. the leadership supporting the private. The leadership want us to advance but the implementation doesn't go with it. That's what I was saying huge cost of not taking the right decision at right time but people still need services, the system still have problem, we don’t have protocols and there is a problem of us not taking decision, what could hinder the implementation is us because we don't have the same level of understanding mode, technical level, what are the issue we are trying to solve? But legal environment is there and is supportive except the implementation.


Interviewer: What would you recommend as a processes to have a buy in all the key stakeholders?  How about international funders? Multilateral/ bilateral organization? 


Respondent: I recommend, I think probably it might not sound aligned with their vision but number one, I’ll recommend them to  inject money where they give funds to the partner which I think they should, because of maybe they are funding arrangements  they're not maybe funding they don't funding for specific project which is somehow risky.  Give the money to the privates operator, which is somehow very risky because that area is not yet known or mean implemented in that country. I'll give you a similar example. You can send it very well. You see when Bably came at that time, it was not clear and the digital health but because they found that government, they came in the sector of service provision. Let's say, for example, even though it's quite new, digital health but because it was aligned with what the government wanted of course with COVID. Yeah COVID come after, but cause the government want to promote the digital things investment IT then through that government, the country vision.
So that's why the way  they  get  funding by Bably  I won't say that it's successful, but to find it even the evaluation, but the problem, the delay, I will say that it came somehow from our side because understanding  but from the leadership, it was clear. Yeah. The leadership was clear this the way with digital things and the leadership has proof at proof, its themselves that very, they are very true because when COVID came  were understood very well. Why leadership was pushing us as a sector to embrace the digital health, but I know I'm not criticizing the where this is another way of, but us we keep delaying, it was five years in this world, this ministry back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
And  when the leadership, you know, but as that's why in the, we found that maybe so for, for this lab, cause it's quite new, not yet implemented, it could be very, very difficult. Probably. I will suggest that from the beginning option number one, to discuss directly to government and then it give them the kind of seat capital it tell them government  this is the money you are marked for specific activity to engage.  let's say they give money to MOF, please engage and with MOH  and find a private operator for this  specific area, not through  CHAI but straight to the government,  I will give you another example to support my point  recently there's a money that philanthropies,  if you know that's SDG funding, SDG funding, well philanthropist, they invest money. They injected money private in the same area of private sector because they saw that Rwanda is scaling up in private sector especially health services. That money was passed through SDG funding managed by UN and UN chose one agency and the MOH and UN involved in the negotiation and UNFP was the one pushing and technically coordinating then they asked countries to do proposals then the government drafted the proposal. The UN co -chair of this PCG asked MOH to do the proposal and they tasked MOH to do that work they wanted PPP in health post the proposal was named 1000 health posts they chose this because of the gap depending on the   government commitment. They tasked us to make sure if the post has internet and electricity and money for operators to run. Government leads the proposal and after the proposal was submitted to UNFP coordinator philanthropy he injects money in the body government strongly were pushed and MOF was leading the process. If they can get the government through a strong body either it passes through MOF they give money because they have a good relationship and see the capital they can offer I mean EIB or Gates they then ask us to prepare a good proposal of sample transportation then the private will come after. It has to go by the government and the government engage the Private.
This is what I would recommend to Gates, EIB because it worked as I gave details above if they could task the MOF to do the proposal on sample transportation that can really work.
For the bilateral and multilateral there are two ways. If money is one coming from that European investment bank, but it's from philanthropies but trust this bilateral but we need, we have to work quite careful coming bilateral. Is that bilateral? From USA government that will, can work. if the bilateral, through Belgium because it's strong, this can work too also very well because they have good history. Support big investment in other sectors. But you a small one, the small one, I don't believe, but Multilateral like WHO that's one can work because they receive a lot of money but they can receive money from the philanthropy. 



Question 9.
Interviewer: How would an ideal PPP specially this AHDP PPP design assure the needs of priority populations?

Respondent: I think  that will be the role of the government when they're negotiating, especially the regulation of the price, the good thing the government has issued, the, the pricing policy, and now the ministry order to enforce that policy press policy. The government can regulate the prices on the market so that person will not suffer either paying or co-payment.
Interviewer: How has gender influenced the design of the PPP? Like male and female, do we have any problem there in terms of access of the services when it's come to PPP?


Respondent:  No we don't have a specific issue but gender will be considered when it comes to prioritization. Cause like now  we have specific issue for women Cervical and Breast cancer those, I think some of the, those let's say for example, those  lab services, lab tests we should prioritized especially those things  to make sure the services for women are well provided.


Question 11.
Interviewer:  Some of the things I discussed, any idea on the financial risk. What are the factors do you think, change the discussion around the PPP?


Respondent:  On the financial side. I don't see, it's depend on the time of reference. That's find the private sector, the private operator,  an example I can give for sample transportation,  the private sector brings his own money. Of course.  the reason why, I mean, that's one is for him, but I think once the project, I think for, he it's always get because of that funds the liquidity for the private sector to inject or to start like startup capital. It was already cater in the product, but on our side I mean, I don't see any financial salary risk as far as I mean, the service are provided the only problem that I could anticipate from   the insurance, but also for the insurance, there is a way you can avoid it. It depends the way you negotiate the tariff yeah. You can negotiate the tariff. And then the government, you know, with the insurance, make it low so people can access, the more you increase the tariff it's become more difficult for people to access, call the co-payment. But in general, I can't, I don't see any financial issue this the role of the government to regulate the cost. I think that could be one to anticipate some of the financial issue.


Question 14.
Interviewer: I see, thank you so much. I'm just going a little before. I know your time. Um, some of the questions responded while you respond to others. 
So the question here is what are other recent or early experiences or project have there been in country that can provide lesson for AHDP


Respondent:  I think this model is quite particular. That's what I suggest. I give you that example of SDG funding, because we have developed partners coming to engage in MOH with two source of funding. Philanthropy also fund from a central bank it's quite particular but what they can learn from you know, let's give you an example, not the specific area I  mentioned that one for the COVID  because the government provide over all leadership, the reporting, you know, all those things monitoring make sure that people are reporting their stock. People are getting results, you know, because they're very sensitive because see, I think that could be quite a similar.


Question 16.
Interviewer: Looking at this list who are the key stakeholders in the PPP that were involved that we are missing?


Respondent:  The financial department from MOH because. They were involved in the discussion too, ENABEL, RBC, CHAI, MOF, KING FAISAL should be included too the CFO of it, USAID,UNFP should involve too and the CEO of PSF should be included about labs BMC and Lancet you should keep them , FDA  and PSA too.



Question 21.
Interviewer: What could be the plans in place to support public sector financing of diagnostics? For example, if it's a lab, how much do you think will be needed to have, uh, a general seek treatment center? 


Respondent:  We don't have it, yes we have a master guide in term of engaging privacy, it's a PS private sector engagement master guide. Yeah. That we have submit official to RDB to show our priorities, and lab is on top of priorities in the government we have put diagnostic treatment center.  There is also lab Diagnostic and treatment center and imaging as well. Because we used to get so many investors here but now we have everything set up for five years, we gave ourselves five years and probably it will be changed after five years  this guide shows what are the investment opportunity. What are the incentives? And also process to open a private facility process to open a private pharmaceutical firm all those things.  Regulation, inspection. It's a good document. It is not yet published but it is already signed and we sent it to RDB so that they can use it for marketing.














