Question 1
Interviewer: Please, can you describe your involvement in the public private partnership process under the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda?


Respondent: Thank you very much. I was very much involved in the, PPP between,  my employer and the government of Rwanda, but that one was not introduced,  in the framework of the AHDP because it's an initiative team that was initiated between the two partners, but it was not led by or done through, the AHDP so if am to answer,  in relation to what was done  under AHDP, there is nothing so far but in terms of what my company did or my employer with the government of Rwanda,  I can demonstrate my involvement. Thank you.


Question 2
Interviewer:  Who is your employer? Okay so you, you are saying that you are not familiar with African health diagnostic platform, or you have heard about it.


Respondent: My employer is ABBOTT, I've heard about it and read about it, but the PPP I was involved in was not under AHDP


Question 3.
Interviewer:  What was the process of negotiation of the PPP you are talking about?


Respondent: Yeah, thank you very much ABBOTT has had an idea of partnering with the government of Rwanda to improve, laboratory services and came up with a proposal of better services and a state of the ARTS instruments to improve diagnostic services in Rwandan public laboratories. Then, once the proposal was received by the government of Rwanda, the cabinet indorsed that idea and the sector ministry, which is ministry of health, go into an engagement with Abbott to initiate that partnership with the earlier stage doing the feasibility study as per the PPP law. So, that's how the negotiation initiated actually departed from the proposal Abbott did to the government and then they sat together design the implementation process, which had to initiate with the feasibility study. And during that discussion they outlined, every party’s responsibility in order to implement that feasibility study.



Interviewer:  If I understood very well So Abbott took initiative to propose it to the government of Rwanda a model of PPP, yes?


Respondent: Abbott proposed services, then the government had to abide by the laws. The government of Rwanda has a PPP law in place that would govern that partnership. So, it's not Abbott that introduced a different mechanism of partnering with the government of Rwanda, rather they propose their services and they were to be governed by the PPP Law, which is in place in Rwanda.



Interviewer: For the Abbott to propose the service to the government of Rwanda how did they know what was in the need? on which basis Abbott advanced its idea to propose the services?


Respondent: Abbott like any other pharmaceutical company or public health company does its market research and it works in so many countries, all over the world. So, some of the services that will need platforms utilization includes HIV and some other testing services. So, Abbott new that in Rwanda, there is definitely a need. So, all they wanted was to turn that need into a demand because apple didn't have such machines before. So, they wanted to get into that new market and they wanted to get in differently because in some other, so many other countries, Abbott has not done it in a PPP model PPP, they do it in a supply and a customer relationship, not a PPP as such. So, it was a new thing. They wanted to start with Rwanda, which is actually a new market. And that's how they come up with that idea. And they were allowed to conduct their baseline assessments so that they can, come up with a proposal based on the facts, based on the data that are in place.


Interviewer: Thank you very much for this. And we are really interested to know about this experience of Abbott, because we can base on it maybe for the future development. 
So, my question is to know how Abbott came in and how Abbott knew that Rwanda is in need, which framework did Abbot used to come in?


Respondent: I was saying that the random law is very clear about the PPP when there is a solicitation from the government to a private partner for some services for partnership, then they don't go through this feasibility or proof of concepts. So given that we've gone through the feasibility study, it's a sign that it's the supplier or the private company that approached fast, the government of Rwanda. So, that is an official information that is available. It doesn't mean, probably they didn't talk to some officials, probably they talked, but they were not solicited by the government. 


Interviewer: This is very good, so how Abbott come in to negotiate with Rwanda to contract with the government? How the negotiations went on? 


Respondent: Yeah Thank you very much If I understood properly, I think negotiation means discussing the terms, how do you render the services and, at what cost, and then  actually if I take the two parameters, the cost and the services for the package Abbott  try to bring in, I mean  innovations that would solve many challenges that are faced in Rwanda, like for the supply chain, for example, Abbott  brought in solutions that would solve the issues of expiries and stock outs and, under stocks in laboratories. 
Second, in terms of IT solutions, information, technology wrote in, some solutions as added values to ensure appropriate coordination of oversight of what is taking place in the laboratories. So, there are additional services that Abbott proposed in, in addition to bringing in what class equipment for the diagnostics in Rwanda, in terms of price since Abbott came to a market that is not a Virgin, but had some other suppliers Abbott wouldn’t set the prices higher than the market prices. So, the first agreement on that was that Abbott would set the prices lower or equal to existing prices for the same services. So that's how the major parameters in terms of a contract were negotiated. I brought in the major ones, of course there are details, but in terms of price and services, Abbott had to bring more and charge equal or less amount per service that is rendered. 


Question 4.
Interviewer: What was the sticking point around these negotiations, was it accepted as proposed? 



Respondent: Yeah, like from the side of the government of Rwanda, you can see that one of not accepting a higher price, this is the point they could not give up on, maybe that one is the one I can mention. The government didn't want to spend more than it used to spend on similar services, even though they were interested of course, with the additional services, but they didn't want to spend more. 


Interviewer: How did you solve to include the additional services and maintain the price? 



Respondent: Yeah, there is a lot that is done in terms of price setting. Of course, you look at so many parameters and you may cut operational costs where you can, but Abbott was not losing while reducing the price because there are some other strategies of keeping the costs because the price it has so many dimensions. There are some other areas where we can, cut like operational costs or anything. So, by accepting that price, Abbott found a way of not losing or keeping the business viable, 


Interviewer: Did the services continue to be offered as proposed initially or changed according to the price?


Respondent: No, there's nothing that was changed actually, because the price reduced.


Question 5.
Interviewer: Yeah. Thank you very much. So, who was involved in this initial design of the PPP negotiation? 


Respondent: Of course, there are two parties, Abbott and the government of Rwanda. In the government of Rwanda, there are so many governmental institutions, especially the sector ministry, the ministry of health, and ministry of finance as this is somehow related to finance and economic development. And then RDB that is in charge of businesses and, PPP as well. There is also, I think RPP is under the ministry of finance and economic planning. So, there are hospitals managers were also represented because those instruments are to be installed in hospitals that is on the side of the government. They formed a forum composed of representatives from all those institutions that was called a steering committee and that is per the PPP Law, in addition to the two parties Abbott and the government. There was another partner to the government of Rwanda, which is CHAI which was a kind of supporting the government of Rwanda, providing technical assistance and logistical assistance for all the activities related to implementing the PPP, starting with the feasibility study to take place smoothly. So, the three CHAI, government of Rwanda and Abbott are the parties that were in place to make sure that the PPP takes place. 



Interviewer:  That's very good does RSSB were involved? 


Respondent: No, RSSB was not involved.


 
Interviewer: As you are familiar with the health system in Rwanda, so which hospitals were involved how health sectors represented?


Respondent:  Yeah, actually at the start 13 hospitals were selected and, there are at all the levels that are referral hospitals that are provincial hospitals and district hospitals. So actually, it was like a geographical representation, not only at the certain level of the hospitals but at different areas of the country, North, West, South and East with Kigali city all are represented. 


Interviewer: Who was leading the negotiation on the side of government of Rwanda?


Respondent: There is a steering committee, there is a steering committee which was chaired by one of the government officials then, it was reporting, of course to the ministry. Actually, it was not a one ministry activity it was involving both, I mean the three big institutions, ministry of finance, ministry of health and RDB, so they had put in place a committee to oversee all the activities, which are this steering committee. It was chaired by an official from RBC.


Interviewer: If I understood you well, in technical assistant of CHAI they conducted the feasibility study, and Abbott also conducted feasibility study, so were the two separate feasibility studies or one combined. So, can you expand a little bit more on this? 


Respondent: What Abbott conducted was to actually try to have data to base on so that they can come up with a proposal, that one, they did it separately. It was not a joint activity. It's just for them to have access to information, to know how many tests do you have, how much time does it take for the reagents to be delivered so that they may come up with solution to problems they understand better That one is like a baseline for them to be able to provide an offer. But later on, after the engagement was signed between the ministry and an Abbott, then the feasibility study for it to be evaluated, CHAI came in and facilitated the coordination and the evaluation. Of course, the evaluation was joined between the minister of health and Abbott and CHAI and RBC, of course, to make sure they collect data about the impact that is being brought by, the new PPP. 


Interviewer:  So how did the actors involved in this design process changed between the initial design and the final agreement so how it went on? 


Respondent:  Yeah, thank you very much there is a question you raised earlier knowing if RSSB was involved as part of these discussions. RSSB was not and actually, if you look at the way services are rendered in hospitals, they tie what they deliver to the minimum package that is an official or guiding a list of services and prices they need to base on. So, in some level, like in provincial, I think, and district hospitals, there are some of the services that were to be done using the Abbott technologies, but they were not part of the minimum package of that level. So that means there is no way you can prove the efficiency when service is not being done. Like that one is one of the challenges that made the feasibility study not really a success because, if you have a specialist in a district hospital that specialist cannot request a certain lab test, certain exam, because it's not going to be paid by the insurance, the public insurance organization. So that is the major challenge that was faced. And actually, there are recent discussions where those machines can be moved from where they are while the issue of the minimum package and the tariff in the public hospitals is not yet revised and make it official to include those tests that were not there before.


Interviewer: Did you bring these challenges on the table of negotiation?


Respondent: Yeah, they were brought on the table. They were discussed with the ministry, but it's not something you solve immediately it's it takes some time because it doesn't depend on one institution it takes to involve the social security the RSSB, which manages the insurance. And the solution was not to come in a day or two. That's why one of the options were done were to move the machines to sites that we learn that allowed to carry out those tests. For example, in referral hospitals, we didn't face any problem of that kind, but in district and I think provincial as well, because provincials don't have the full package of services. So that is the major challenge that made with us reverse or look for an alternative way. 


Interviewer:  So how did the actors involved in the design process change between the initial design and the final agreement?


Respondent: Actually, it's as if this question assumes the final agreement was reached, but it's not yet 


Interviewer: So, it is still under negotiation?


Respondent: Yes. There are agreements on what is being done and the price and the services that are being rendered by Abbott that is a form of agreement, but it's not a definitive public private partnership. 


Interviewer: But the actors who were in the negotiation team are still the same, or they have been changed? 


Respondent: Yeah, because it took longer it took very long, longer than planned because of those challenges.  Some people have been moving, of course there is a turnover in every institution, but in terms of institutions and representation, there is no institution that was withdrawn or removed from this process. Only individuals have been moving, and this is something that happens continuously in any organization. So, teams have changed and so many people have moved away from where they used to be like, the chair of the steering committee is no longer there. So, there are so many changes that took place. 


Interviewer: How did this change affected the process and the progress?


Respondent: Yeah, but also many other big kinds of strong factor came in place which I think may lead us believe that they are the only factors because those are the factors. We couldn't observe the effect since they're not the only ones they're not alone for example, because of COVID some of the activities were stopped. So, people tend to believe that everything that happened or that did not happen was due to COVID probably the absence of some people would impact, but we can't account about it since COVID, if everyone was there, COVID, wouldn't allow that we progress. So, the big animal we see is COVID than seeing people moving and affecting the progress of the activities. 


Interviewer:  So how COVID-19 affected the process? 


Respondent: Yes, especially the evaluation, the evaluation of the feasibility study. 


Interviewer:  So, in this interval have there been any champions supporting the PPP?


Respondent: So, we got separate individuals to institutions. Of course, there are champions, there are people who were presenting their respective institutions in this process. And they're the ones who champion this PPP. 


Interviewer: Have there been any actor trying to propose opposite direction from the main actors working in the PPP? 


Respondent: No, there was not any actors proposing to reverse or change anything, 


Question 6.
Interviewer: So, who or which institution have been ultimately responsible for approving the PPP design? 


Respondent: Actually, it's not a one institution responsibility. It was done jointly between different sectors as well, because if we had a RDB and a minister of finance, and there is no single institution that would decide on its own it's a joint activity. Of course, there are phases that are there for approving the process but it doesn't depend on one institution. They aligned ministry, the sector ministry, which is ministry of health was managing it on day-to-day basis. But they could not resolve everything before consulting or submitting to the steering committee or having the review by RDB and ministry of finance. Because as per PPP law, it's like a in the procurement process, there is no single position or person who can decide all the steps. It goes through different hands. So that it can ensure review and transparency. So that's why we cannot say there is only one that will be like the main major one or the one who would influence separately. 


Question 7.
Interviewer: So, what option were or still being considered when designing the PPP model?


Respondent: Thank you very much, if I may explain the way I understand it first of all Abbott proposed the placement of instruments in different hospitals. So, placement in what we call reagent agreement plan whereby the machine is not purchased by the customer but placed by the manufacturer or the supplier and the business will turn around the purchase of reagents. And actually, the maintenance is guaranteed by the supplier. So that's what is still going on Abbott placed instruments and for those instruments whereby the tests done those point of care, if I may say so, like chemistry, hematology, there is no referral. The machine does perform the test for that facility where it is installed, because those are tests that are required in emergency or immediately the decision needs to be made for the patient.
So that kind of tests is done for only that facility. But in addition to those instruments, there are molecular instruments as well. For those ones it's not even efficient to place instruments in every hospital. There is a referral of specimen from the cut area, for example from one facility to that referral site so that they can be consolidated and tested at that very facility. So, it's a combination because the technologies that were brought are different and they can be used utilized differently as well. So, in brief, for molecular there is referral of specimen but for chemistry hematology, the machine does only the, the test for only that facility. There's no referral.


Interviewer: Thank you very much. Does Abbott selected the health facilities, which it would want to operate in, or the health facilities were assigned by the government?


Respondent: That one, I cannot give an exact answer but it was agreed upon between the two parties. I don't know who brought the list first, or if Abbot wished to go in, A, B, C, D, but I'm not sure they would come with a choice, but it may have been, guided by the ministry, and then they came up with an agreement to operate in the 13 facilities.


Interviewer: Which criteria were based on to select the hospitals you are working in?


Respondent: Yes, the major criteria was let's say geographical because the hospitals that were selected, most of them are satellite labs in across near the borders. So, you can see all the corners of the country were represented. another factor, which, I'm not certain about may be the volume for the two parties to find an adequate sample to prove the concept they needed, adequate, amount of testimonial so that they can, demonstrate if the efficiency or the viability of that business.


Question 8.
Interviewer: How appropriate do you find the design of this model of Abbott to the local context?


Respondent: It doesn't match exactly the situation in country, but it can be adapted. For example, the bottoms that were observed, there are things that can be worked on and things can move very well for the example I gave is about the prices in the facilities, if the prices or the tariff depends on the minimum package, I think the government can work on that and, come up with a solution because, what we call minimum is not actually the, the limit minimum is the, at least what, you're supposed to do. It's not the maximum you need to provide a service. So, if that interpretation is converted into a decision to allow the facilities, to submit the bills with those extra services, it's an easy thing to adapt. So, the model is fine with Rwanda, but the, the small bottoms can be addressed.  I'm not sure there is a perfect model that can come without any need for adapting or adjusting. Yeah, but it doesn't mean it's not adapted to Rwanda.



Interviews:  so how disruptive is the PPP to the current system and how much change will it require?


Respondent: Yeah, actually the PPP which is between one supplier and the government. It's not pleasant to other suppliers who are also interested in the market. That is one factor on business side. 
Interviewer: Can you insist on that, elaborate a little bit more on that?


Respondent: Example, I'm not the one to decide or propose, but I think, if Abbott won the contract in the government of Rwanda, the way it is stated that they will be the ones to supply and actually to manage the labs. That's how the statement of the cabinet resolution says so that would mean if they there were to be exclusive, some other suppliers may not, be in the market anymore. So, if they can still sustain all the services well, and good, the population is going to be served, but the side of being disruptive is on that the competition, so that's it and that is a perception of course, that many other suppliers may have. And I, I think that's all I can say, but in case of not wanting to rely on only one supplier, maybe the government can decide to combine all to make sure they have strong commitment with that supplier so that they prevent any potential of the interruption of the services
I worked on the side of the government as well before I joined the other sector so I know we've been, facing the challenge of diversity of equipment, and actually the reason we couldn't get rid of that equipment that are causing different problems associated with managing so many suppliers managing many contracts of maintenance. The supplies were multiple and very hard to manage the logistics was very heavy. So that issue was to be resolved by a harmonization of platforms. But if, for example, the government has purchased instruments that are in place, they're in the accounting books of the government, their assets of the government. So, introducing completely new platforms means you are going to discard equipment that still have some residuals values.
So for example, you have a laptop, someone donates, a new one you need to discard the old one but the old one has some value. Let's say 20% or 50% of its value when new. So, you understand, the kind of, laws that may happen in case you need to replace completely what was in place, unless that issue is also regarded as another source of income or any other way of transforming or transferring them or reselling them, or refinishing them, or take them to teaching institutions, but still there may be some loss. So that's what I wanted to add in, in addition to my other comment.


Interviewer: So, thank you so much. What you would recommend as the process to have a buy-in for all stakeholders?


Respondent: Yeah, thank you very much, actually I think for you to be able to win the buying in of those stakeholders you need to make sure you provide the proposal or a model that really meets what they care about. If for example, their biggest concern is about accessibility quality of the diagnostic services. Then that's what you need to bring on the table, as a solution that would solve the most pricing challenges they're facing. If in another market, their problem is about efficiency or financial accessibility. Then you need to adapt the model to the problems its context is facing.
So in a small country like Rwanda, where a sample transport is doable, is feasible. Maybe they don't need a large number of platforms, but a coordinated way of sending out samples for, let's say way applicable, like molecular or sequencing those transferable samples. But for context like DRC, I'm not sure it is part of the AHDP, but maybe there are some other countries like Ethiopia. I saw Ethiopia in, in the list. So those large countries where even the infrastructure transportation infrastructure is not even adequate. The referral system of specimen is also a challenge because of transportation roads or mechanism. That means they may need even point of care or some additional solutions. So, the model should really take care of the challenge, the specific challenges of each particular country. That's how I think you can get the buy in from all the stakeholders and it needs to be adapted to the context of each country.


Interviewer: What would you recommend because you know in Rwanda because you are familiar with the local context?


Respondent: Yeah, in Rwanda, for example in terms of geographical accessibility, and in terms of the population size, we don't need to multiply giant equipment’s in all the facilities we rather need to create and strengthen the hubs. You see, for example, if you have a population in Kigali, that's not, beyond two, 2.5 million, we don't need to have five to seven big laboratories with big equipment’s. You can have like two or three few sites that do the specialized testing you see, and then for the remote facilities, maybe you can place, like 10 points of care, to make sure at least the screening is done there. And the referral is done for only those that need confirmation. But in Rwanda, we don't need to multiply big platform, diagnostic platforms in all the facilities, except those that need immediate results by the clinicians.


Question 9.
Interviewer: What would be an ideal PPP design accommodate the needs of priority population?


Respondent: Yeah actually, I think to make sure all the levels, all the groups of the population are served. The PPP model would take into account a holistic healthcare delivery. Holistic means from the community level to referral and acute and sophisticated care. So that means deploying adequate or appropriate resources, depending on the level. And the needs of the population. Of course, some of those services will be a bit centralized and found to the specialized facility with facilities, with equipment and staff that is able to utilize that. But for example, in the community they need let's say for maternal and child health the primary healthcare that is delivered to those two groups, it doesn't require sophisticated equipment, but it needs to be accessible and near everyone in the community level, for example, at the health post level.
And then as we go up in the pyramid, there need to be harmonized equipment, infrastructure, and capacity of the personnel to be able to optimally utilize those technologies, to deliver, services that the population is in need of. So, it can be a combination of all those aspects, but taking into account the needs. For example, let's say for NCDs for let's say blood sugar monitoring. It's one of the things that helps people living with diabetes live healthier than they would be if not well monitored. So, it doesn't mean a sophisticated equipment, but accessibility of patient to the point of care machines would help them at least, access the services they need the most and every time. So, the PPP would actually take into account a holistic approach of solving all the problems of the population, because after all when someone deploys an equipment, that has a limited menu and that's all the rest of the problem is not looked at it.
It doesn't solve the issue that the country's facing in the end. It's not only viral load or biochemistry or hematology that is done for the population of Rwanda. They need also to test, pregnancy, to test the syphilis, to test malaria, hepatitis and everything. And all those tests are not done at let's say a referral level, even below the health center level, those services are needed even in the community level and why not even self -testing. So, the PPP that is needed in Rwanda is the one that covers all the ranges from the lowest to the highest referral facility. 


Interviewer: Current design you are working with in Abbott, is different from this ideal design you are talking about if you compare?


Respondent: Yeah. If I compare actually the proposal that Abbott submitted to the government of Rwanda, it didn't consolidate all the solutions that Abbott have, for example in the later on, after the PPP actually had initiated Abbot also brought in a support to the construction of community. I mean those community facilities are called Health Post. The Health Post and equipped with small kits a bundle of tests that are needed, the most in the community. For example, if those were incorporated in the, in the package that was submitted in the PPP the value and the impact it would have to the community in general would be greater than only deploying large, sophisticated equipment. So of course, they introduced that, but it's not part of the PPP that is being the discussed.


Interviewer: So, what would be necessary to get to the PPP closer to the ideal vision? So compared to your ideal model and what is being done, so what will be required to get closer to that?



Respondent: Yeah, actually for Abbott because is a big institution that has so many divisions. That's why   when we talk of rapid diagnostic, it's a separate division. When we talk of molecular, it's a separate division and the others diagnostic, but if there was an integration, when they had to propose something to a country, they do an integration of all those components to make comprehensive and holistic package that covers all the needs. Of course, if there is a gap that can be, cannot be covered by one supplier it would be a good, to be wiser for the government to look for supplementary partnership. It doesn't mean partnering with the government is you need to be only one supplier, if is better in rapid and point of care than in molecular, for example the government can contract for a particular package and then look for another one for another particular package. But if you look for one supplier that can serve you everything, I'm not sure I will get the best for everything. Yeah, let’s say for you to put on a complete you to wear your clothes, you don't buy from the same house. You don't put on the same brand. Some brands of shoes are better in one house. And for the suit, you look for another one.  But it's not compulsory that you can contract to one supplier for everything. All you need to is to map your needs from start from the tank to head and make sure on every stage you contract the test in that area.


Interviewer: Thank you very much. So how has gender or social economic status or poor influenced the design of the PPP?


Respondent:  Apart from the urban population, the population of Rwanda is somehow homogenous to the point that you cannot say that in the Eastern part of Rwanda, probably they are poor, or they have particular diseases that will need different prescription of instrument and service. So, the technologies and the services that were deployed to every participating site did not take into account such differences because it's assumed they're not major. So, I think gender and social economy they didn't influence much, maybe it's because of the type of test that were part of the feasibility. I mean the PPP if you were to talk about maternal child health, as I was talking about it earlier, probably that will be taken into account social economic. Let's say, if we are talking about malaria diagnosis, maybe some geographical, social or economic status of populations may influence the type of resources to allocate to.  May be the type of diseases that are covered with the equipment’s in this PPP, don't make a significant difference in terms of populations in different areas.


Question 10.
Interviewer:  So how would the PPP design address key consideration to improve access of laboratory diagnostics if PPP is proposed?


Respondent: I think apart from the fact that some were not allowed to wouldn't be reimbursed for the test they did for, ensure customers otherwise labs would benefit from this PPP equally, because there is no particular challenge in regards to utilizing the instruments following the model that was adopted.


Interviewer: What about the availability or the quality, efficiency and affordability of laboratory diagnostics in the PPP?


Respondent:  Yeah, laboratory diagnostic, actually the cost or the price is not only dependent on what is supplied, what is purchased from the supplier's it’s multifactorial parameter. It depends on the operational cost. It depends on the other inputs, other resources that are put in place at the facility level across all the chain, actually. So, in terms of efficiency, I think we haven't reached a level where we start, really seeing, a big impact because, when you utilize a few tests, you don't see a significant impact on the cost, but if the volume increases, then you can benefit much more from the efficiency. Yeah. Maybe we haven't reached that level mathematically we can demonstrate it, but operationally we didn't reach that level because the test volumes were very low.
Yeah. Thank you very much. I think in my opinion, first of all the challenges, that were being faced before the introduction of this PPP, there are very many, and there are not yet solved the issue of diversity of equipment for example if you can't estimate the expenditures on laboratory tests, simply because you are dealing with so many unit prices, so many pricing from different suppliers, then it's a problem. If you can't quantify the expenditures on laboratory products, it's, it's a very big challenge then, uh, if you negotiate a PPP, uh, that means you are in control of the cost because you negotiate it ahead of time. You negotiate it. You know, the, the cost of reagents the cost of maintenance the cost of consumable, these ones I know the estimate, and I know who is going to be paying what, including the partner, the supplier. So only that feasibility is a benefit that clarify of knowing your expenditures, it's already a benefit, but with the current situation whereby you buy the reagents for an instrument placed in hospital A tomorrow, you'll buy for another, in a different type in hospital B you have more than 40 something hospitals. And more than let's say, 12 biochemistry machines. You see. So that means those machines are not just machines. They're different brands.
So given that diversity, the cost, the expenditure on laboratory commodity, you can't master it. So, the only way to master it is to make sure you harmonize the platforms, you know, the suppliers you're working with, they may not be one, but at least you limit it to select it. Suppliers you have contract with, and then you can agree on the price and decide the price or negotiate it based on what they're going to offer you and your purchasing power and the needs of your population.


Interviewer: Thank you very much. So which consideration is the best served by the current design? If you compare what you have said and what is being offered by Abbott? 



Respondent: For example, in terms of harmonization, which has always been a challenges Abbott was proposing instruments.  So, let’s say for hematology, it's one type for chemistry, it’s one type that means you'll get rid of those multiple brands and multiple brands actually means multiple types of reagents, multiple contracts, multiple everything. So, harmonization is catered for, and actually since we were inspired about the challenge is being faced in terms of delivery of reagents on time, so Abbott is also solving the issue of delivering the reagents by cutting the chain, shortening the chain because when the supply chain is very long, it increases the cost operational costs. And it reaches the facility when it is really expensive. And it also increases the time, the delivery time, but Abbott came up with approach of delivering directly to the hospitals. So, the supply side, the harmonization and actually the IT solutions that were installed on the machines, which help visualize the data remotely. It's also a solution that helps, the managers to oversee what is taking place in the facilities.


Interviewer: Thank you. I was asking about among these consideration you are talking about, so which is currently receiving the least attention in the current design and the why?


Respondent:  I can't say there is something not being given the attention because every party hasn't come up with this negotiation points and where they stand in terms of every aspect, but informally you hear people fearing monopoly, Let me explain it by the situation whereby rely on one supplier Because people maybe tend to believe that when you are only with one supplier in case anything went wrong, you'll be putting your population at risk. So that is one side people tend to believe it's, a challenge but if well discussed it cannot be a challenge. Yeah, that's one of the things.



Question 11.
Interviewer:  Thank you very much. So, what factors do you think changed the discussion around the PPP?


Respondent: It's hard to tell actually the factors, but let me say that PPP is not new, but in health sector, that kind of PPP was something new. So, for anything new, there are always some unpredicted events or maybe people don't immediately believe what is being said. So, believing a new, strategy of doing business while you are used to operating with multiple suppliers, probably might affect the way people perceive the PPP it's a new thing. And people tend to fear to be reluctant getting into it as maybe they never know, they're not sure about what is going to result from it.
So, yeah, that is on both sides actually on both sides. Cause even the supplier who never did it elsewhere, doesn't have that strong, belief and experience in the success of the PPP and the country. The government also has it done that kind of agreement with another supplier for that large project like the laboratory the whole country. And actually, the fact that it’s a matter that relates to public health, it's a very sensitive, to look at and I think perception because there is no experience on both sides. Maybe perception may not be very optimistic among all the people who review or who are involved.


Interviewer:  Can you elaborate little bit more about how COVID 19 affected the PPP design?


Respondent: the way it affected the way COVID affected is that there was an evaluation going evaluation of the feasibility study, the outcome of that pilot phase. So that one did not continue because all the attention was paid to COVID response, but it's not that people are not testing. People are testing, but the meetings we would hold to discuss the outcomes, the site visits that were being, conducted all those activities were delayed. That's how COVID affected.


Question 12.
Interviewer: Oh, thank you very much. So, if there is any technical support facilitating and financing for the PPP, how would the availability of this support affect the PPP design?


Respondent: I think when things are well done in the start at the planning phase then the implementation and the results will be a success. So, prescribing a model should rely on a well and thoroughly analyzed context and content of the PPP. So, to me if the technical support and financial support is provided to understand the context, to understand the model to put in place all the terms of the agreement to be well started, to make sure it's viable cooperation between the two parties. that's where the intervention is much needed. And it will benefit quick implementation because part of the analysis it can do is understanding the content. for example, there is a challenge related to the test that will not be done because they're not on the tariff, if that was for seen, maybe a timely decision would have made, we would have been made and the challenges that resulted from that one wouldn't be faced. So, I think the support is needed heavily at the start at the conception phase to make sure the rest of the phases are running smoothly without any challenge.
Because for example, in the context of this PPP there are some discussions, there are some questions, there are some, issues that were on the table being discussed that were not clear in the heads of everyone. But if the analysis was done before the study was before the design, the terms are done in a way that answers all those concerns. That means even the adherence or the buy-in of all the stakeholders would be quicker. And the results would be, very successful.


Interviewer: that is very important. So, what are the features of the PPP design that would not be possible without this technical support?


Respondent:  first of all, what is done the, engagement, the implementation, the placement of the instruments or any solutions is a result of both parties being convinced that this thing is doable and is profitable. So, the fact that the proposal, the initial also makes sense to every party is the only convincing step to the following stages of the theme. So, if the planning or the proposal phase is not well established it's very likely that the PPP, all the phases be it, the engagement or the implementation are not, is not going to be done successfully.


Interviewer:  how would you recommend that technical support being used to address any gap, existing gap, all weaknesses capacity among key stakeholders?


Respondent: I think if, this support was addressed to the government, because the suppliers will respond to the partnership and actually, they'll come in filling the cops or providing services that were requested by the government. So, it's better that the government be able to understand the needs because the government has the vision knows where they want to take a population, too but the quality of the services they want to achieve in 50 years, but it's not the supplier to come and tell you that I have a solution to all your problems. Sometimes he can mislead you. Oh, he can give you what you don't really need. Maybe you need it today, but in a few years, it won't be to serving your population the way you want. So, if that support was allocated to governments to clearly, do an analysis for an assessment of the needs, do a projection of what kind of services they need, now and in the future, and then come up with requirements for a service provider to come in.
That's how that kind of support would benefit the beneficiary, which is the government and the consequently the population. So, to me, the needs need to originate for the government, which knows, understand the needs and the vision they have for the population. So, the technical assistance needs to be provided to the government to do a clear study what our clear needs today to every level, what kind of service provided we need in this context, for example maternal health care or in community health, what would we need in centralized or, I mean referral sites, everything, and then after understanding the needs and what kind of service you need, then you can know what kind of partner you need.


Question 13.
Interviewer: So, the following questions is about, the policy context and the historical relationship that influence over the PPP. So, the question is how supportive is the existing policy legal and the regulatory framework for PPP?


Respondent: Yeah, in the case of Rwanda, since Rwanda has already, PPP law in place and the organs that in enforce that policy and that law actually are in place and active, it's not only in papers, but it's something that is in practice. That means when the proposal came, there was a clear interpretation and orientation as to what, procedures need to be followed, as per the law. So, the presence of a law in place is something, that, and the law was really clear. It's not related something related or it's clearly stated, uh, public private partnership. So, the presence of that law, which indicates all the processes, all the procedures to follow all those committees to be formed the process step by step from the proposal to the sign off of the agreement, definitive agreement, it really guided, there was no confusion at all.


Interviewer: So how much resistance among policy makers will these PPP need to overcome to garner the necessary support?


Respondent: You see, actually anything that is new, these approaches are new and they're being introduced for the first time. So of course, people who in a certain comfort of having multiple suppliers, having multiple options may be reluctant to opting a few one or for a certain service. So, resistance cannot be overlooked but it can be overcome, in such a way that any potential show reasons for resistance or any unanswered questions can be answered upfront while am establishing the project proposal of the PPP cause that proposal should be able to answer any potential questions that can be raised from many actors from all the people who would need to buy that idea when it details all the processes from start to the end. Well, clearly defined everyone would find answers to the questions it would be raising.


Interviewer:  How flexible is the PPP to changes in the government or government priorities?


Respondent: I think it depends on how it started, but in my view, PPP should come based on the needs of the government. For example, if a government needs to offer certain services to the population while the government itself doesn't have the means or the resources to operate it to, solely then it needs to partner with some private organizations. So, in that case at least even if you don't have all the means to provide those services, alone, at least you know, the minimum requirement is defining your problems clearly and what the solutions to your problems should look like when you know the solutions, what you are looking for, it's easy to attract anyone, you know, that they're not going to stretch you. And they have you from you're looking for you are farm through what you want offer to your population and what means you have in place yeah, I think that's where, emphasis need to be put


Interviewer: How flexible the PPP should be in the case of these priorities change?


Respondent: It's just to be provided by the agreement. For example, if you agreed that you are going to do a certain project together with an organization, and then later on you find different other facts that and redirect the intervention for the implementation, then it has to be stipulated in the agreements. Of course, the agreement shouldn't be written on stone, there should be ways of amending the agreements as you go along with the implementation. So, if that is stated in the agreement that there will be, let's say the monitoring mechanism of seeing how things evolve and adapting to the context and to the situation. That's the only way you can have the PPP flexible. The PPP it's not something that is already meant. It's an agreement you are going to make depending on what you envisioned to do together. So, it's up to the two parties to agree.
So that agreement should stipulate ways of adapting the agreement, depending on the context, if you had planned the situation to go on a certain phase. And then later on you observe different shift, you should be able to adapt to the situation. And the only way to be able is to have the agreement, still that you can review together and, amend accordingly. So, PPP itself is not a fixed, it's not terms that are already like written on the stones.


Question 14.
Interviewer: Yeah. So, if tomorrow we need to establish a PPP another kind of PPP So what kind of experience or lessons that you may suggest to pay attention with to have the success?


Respondent: Thank you very much, actually the first thing is engaging all the stakeholders. If you exclude any later on, you would see that you would have consulted that had the stakeholder. For example, if in the health sector, we need finance, we need healthcare insurance. We need the hospitals for us to make, informed the decision. We need to involve them at the start and let them understand what we envisage to do in details. Yeah, that part is really crucial and, it can help implementation with many more resistance.


Interviewer: What are the similarities or differences between the approach of AHDP and Abbott or Roche?


Respondent: Well, I think AHDP is like a mechanism of facilitating countries acquire those agreements. It's not like Abbott or Roche. If I read properly, it's like an initiative that is going to help developing countries to acquire or to enter this agreement. In terms of Roche and Abbott they're similar in terms their nature. They are both public health organizations and actually their scope of operation is in terms of product lines. The only difference depended heavily on the performance. Otherwise, the equipment, the technologies, they have so many similarities, one is stronger in this aspect. Another one is stronger in the other aspect. My previous version may be not as good as yours, but tomorrow I can up with a better version. So, they keep, um, competing and everyone has something, he presents as an advantage.
So on that one, I won't be specific that Abbott is better or Roche is better. There are so many aspects where Abbott can beat Roche and vice versa, the rest would be their performance, how you satisfy your customers, how reliable you are, you see, otherwise these technologies, if they're validated, if they're prequalified by the WHO and these other international organizations, they meet the minimum requirements for them to solve the populations. So that is at least the minimum everyone meets the remaining part, may depend on a particular customer who really needs that particular aspect. That is from Abbott not from Roche, but generally they're all good farms. The difference now in Rwanda, maybe the way they operate, Roche is just a supplier, not in a long-term contract or not envisaging to have a long-term agreement with the government of RDA beyond supplying and servicing the instruments, but Abbott has taken a step further to see if they can partner and include additional services to make sure the populations are better served.


Interviewer: How trusting collaborative is the relationship between the public private sectors for health?



Respondent: I think apart from even the health sector, in Rwanda the government and the service providers or private operators, I think there is a lot of trust. The trust, the level of trust is really high. And actually, the reason, the fact behind that is that for example, you supply good or services to the government, you're quite sure I'll be paid it's really something, very precious in Rwanda that there is no supplier who can supply you or request you to pay upfront because it doesn't trust, you'll pay later on. So that is something really that increases the trust, the level of trust between the governmental or private organizations. Second, maybe the government also has some trust to private, organizations in such a way that to ensure or to assert that trust is maintained high.
That procurement process that is really sophisticated, they shortlist you only when you meet a certain level of confidence. So in terms of trusting whether the other part is going to deliver to the expectation, I think there are mechanisms of ensuring that is respected then in terms of transparency, the government of Rwanda is really well scored by the private sector.


Interviewer: How has historical relationship between the public and the private sector for health influenced the current PPP arrangement?


Respondent:  For example, in my experience with the procurement entity in Rwanda, I worked with both the central medical supply that is RMS and which are all doing, procurement apart from a few suppliers who used to request for advanced payment because of some other factors, not the lack of trust, almost all the suppliers are happy to sign the contract and send the suppliers and wait for being paid later on. Secondly now that most public institutions are E-procurement, there is really demonstrated transparency. It's much clearer than, it was before. So based on that, I can attest that, the level of trust and, based on my experience with, all those suppliers who send their products and feel comfortable. It is really profound. 


Question 15.
Interviewer: Thank you very much. So, what has been the historic investment and interest from government in laboratory diagnostic? 


Respondent: Yeah. First of all, there is infrastructure laboratory have been really upgraded in the past. It used to be a very small room in the corner, where even if you had an equipment, you wouldn't have a place where to install it. So now in almost all the hospitals, the labs were upgraded to a certain really higher standard level in terms of infrastructure of course, the government did that in collaboration with partners, but overall coordination or prioritization is done by the government then in terms capacity building, it's also an investment. The government has trained so many lab scientists, which really increased the diagnostic capacity in laboratories, in terms of equipment. So many equipment’s were procured, others were placed by leasing.
So, it's also a huge investment. And in terms IT solutions so many applications have been purchased and put in place to make sure the release of results is done electronically. And people can view the results from, central level to across all the levels of the pyramid. So those are the kind of investments that were done. Otherwise, there are some other types of investment. You can't touch the documentation. I talk about training, but also documentation. If there are policies and other guiding documents in place, it's also one of the strengths of diagnostic systems. So, the government also did that in terms of putting in place policies, guidelines, and other standard procedures in place in all the levels of the health facilities.


Interviewer:  So how does the improvement in the laboratory diagnostics align with the government priorities for the health sector?


Respondent: Actually, if we are aiming at universal healthcare, you can't talk about healthcare without diagnosis and actually for any medical decision laboratory is relied on to provide the results and then guide the clinical decisions. So, with the government's aim of ensuring quality healthcare for all laboratory has played really those investments terms of acquiring equipment, training people expanding the laboratory buildings or building new ones. All those have helped the laboratories to meet that increasing demand in testing. Cause when you increase access, that means you increase the number of tests and when you increase the number of tests while the rooms and the testers are not increasing, then there is no way you can meet that target. So, the fact that the labs have increased in terms of infrastructure, the equipment and the personnel is helping meeting that target of ensuring universal health care for all.
And actually, if you look at the way Rwanda has responded to epidemics, let's start with Ebola. The fact that we made sure that there is no suspected case that is not detected, even if we were lucky, we did not have any, but that there are efforts in terms of testing that were being made to make sure we can detect. For COVID Rwanda was able to face the pandemic to make sure the testing, capabilities are everywhere. Even the PCR was decentralized. Now we have PCR in almost, all the regions of the country. So, all those efforts that were made for helping the country face the diagnostic needs.


Interviewer: What is the profile of health workers relative to diagnostic system including training and cadres?


Respondent:   I've had opportunities of visiting remote health centers. I think of recent; I think not more than three years I was in health centers and I could notice that there are some, laboratorians who are not really, trained laboratorians. There are people who did some other studies, but because they needed some people in place, they had to train someone who didn't do lab in secondary and then, make him a lab technician to see in terms of human resource. It's still scars, still discuss maybe at hospital level. They have at least  professionals who are trained, even if hospitals claim to have  limited budget to hire more given the volume of the work but at least at level of hospitals and up and urban areas, there is adequate staffing, but  remote health centers are still suffering maybe because those professionals that did university studies cannot go that far or given the budget to pay them in those remote areas, the conditions of life and the standard they want to be at probably, it's affecting those remote health facilities. But generally, in terms of human resource for laboratory services the level is really considerably good.


Question 16.
Interviewer: So, who are the key stakeholders in the public private partnership and why are they involved?


Respondent: Starting from for health sector, the ministry of health is supposed to be the line ministry which sets policies and see the implementation while RBC is the implementation arm of the government in terms of health. So, their presence is really relevant and is compulsory in terms of PPP. So, looking at the ministry of finance, it comes to partnerships that involves budget. It's a generation of revenue it's generation some income on the side of the government it entails expenditures and expenditures are done by the ministry of finance. So apart from their role in planning, they also have a say in terms of expenses and revenues. So, the ministry of finance really is relevant, stakeholder in terms of the PPP for sector and actually RPPA, I don't know if it was mentioned because it's an acquisition means, procurement or purchasing something, so R PPA is the regulatory body for the procurement processes for government organizations, Rwanda development board, is the one that is in charge of all business development.Be it purely private, they're the ones who provide an environment who register the businesses, be it a partnership with the government they're also involved because they kind of regulate the business development, in terms of   private and public partnership.  Rwanda medical supply, if they have the responsibility now to procure commodities, if the procurement is going to be done in a different other mechanism, they need to be involved. They are resourceful in terms of knowing the workflow, the flow of commodities, the challenges, the realities in the field, or if they need to be part of the channel, of that partnership they need also to be involved in the PPP. They may not later on participate in the implementation, but they need to be part of the bigger forum to make sure they provide their input because they're experts in terms of supplies of medical products. And they're the ones who feel the challenges, the needs of the customer in terms of supply.
The private procurement supplier, I think, is similar to RMS in terms of their role. So, private labs. So, I think this list is not only for the PPP, but also for those that you are targeting to discuss with. I think so. Yeah, the private labs or private hospitals, if the government needs to be, to carry out, to hold any PPP with a private supplier, then I think there's no need to involve them because any expertise they have in terms of the management of health commodities is available in the government hospitals.
I think their importance here in terms of being involved in PPP is not compulsory. So, insurances, health insurances be it private or public RSSB and other insurances, they're the ones who pay the bills.


Interviewer: What would be the important of global partnership or funders?


Respondent: Yeah, the funders operate in many countries. They have access to data or access to foreign experiences. That is one thing. Second, they have a stake as they're also funding. If you   value my funding, you'll involve me in all the decisions that are going to be funded with my money. So, they're like, uh, the partners, the development partners of the government, you can there's no way you can leave them aside while starting something which you will again, call them to help you in finance. So, in addition to the experience, the whole budget that you'll need in the future, so you need their expertise in many other countries to see that concept was done elsewhere and was successful.
But also, they need to know where you are orienting the funding in the future. Cause they also have their internal regulations which may conflict probably with what you are doing, probably in their procurement for policies of spending. Maybe they're not in agreement with the type of agreement you're going to do with a certain supplier, if the PPP, uh, was done in a way that is contradictory to their internal procedures. So, you need to abide by their regulations too.


Interviewer: So, thank you for considering this list of stakeholders so how do they perceive the advantages and the disadvantages of the PPP?


Respondent: Yeah. I think the perspective vary depending on institution, for example, you are out of the sector, your judgment or your perception is going to be totally different if the cost benefits or the ministry of health and RBC, are there to oversee all those technical aspects or the clinical of benefits. So, I think on the budget side, they look at the profitability, those who are in the health sector they will look at, especially doesn't mean they don't look at the other side, but, they're more focused or more concerned with the clinical outcomes the technical benefits of that partnership. So, it depends on really the institution and the area of expertise for the insurance, companies maybe if you may promote something that increases the cost, but also increases the quality of services as a technical or clinical organization. But for the insurance, they will see it as an extra expense. They'll perceive it differently. So, the perception defers depending on where you seat.


Interviewer: What would be their incentives to participate in PPP?


Respondent: Some of them, I think most of them actually by the law, they have to participate because they have the role to play. It's part of their work. If anything comes up related to PPP it says you'll be involved if you are RDB, the ministry of finance or if you are the line ministry of that sector. So, but the other motivation in addition to being a mandate of your institution is solving a problem that was not to be solved with the government means. So that one would attract you because you found a partner who is going to fund or to provide his inputs or investments. So that is a particular problem that we couldn't afford to with our means is going to be solved. So that a motivation that is behind any organization to get involved in PPP is actually problem solving.  


Question 17.
Interview: whose interests are helped or hurt by laboratory diagnostics happening in the public vs. the private sector?



Respondent: let's say, if a test is done in a private lab or if it is done in public I think, provided that the quality of service rendered to the customer, the patient is really maintained. Otherwise, there is no rules, even if the labs were private and I don't think the government is at the point of competing with the private sector provided that the patient can peace out. So, I think there is no loss, maybe when it is done in the public, the private labs, maybe losing business, but if it is done in private, since the government is not competing very much with the private businesses, I think, the major thing is that the customer be served for sure the fact that tests are done in public probably the private labs may be not benefit because they set up the businesses for them to make money. So, if test is done away that means there is an opportunity you're not getting. 


Question 19.
Interviewer: How interested are the private partners in participating in PPP?


Respondent: I think this PPP concept is not yet clear to everyone. That means even the managers of these, these big farms, don't perceive it as a way to go generally, but probably with time, if they were approached probably and discussed and maybe they can get much more interested, but a traditional way of doing this business in, biotech sector is making sure you place your instrument and they purchase your reagents. That is the core business, the core mission. So, the PPP, I don't think many companies have started thinking about it though it is a way that it's a win-win situation you sell and the governments also benefit. So, I'm not sure, I think their interest is not yet high. 


Interviewer: So, what are private partner’s main questions around participating in the PPP? 



Respondent: Their major concern is the volume, the testing volume. They need to see the return by having the so many reagents purchased. That is their major concern, it wasn't sufficient for the areas like I said for, because of those tariffs, some of the tests were affected, so the volumes were not high. 


Interviewer: What are the biggest incentives for private partners to participate in the PPP in country?


Respondent: To gain the biggest proportion of the market share.
Interviewer: Okay so what are the biggest drawbacks for private partners to participate in the PPP? 

Respondent: The first thing I think, is not having the reference, where else was it successful? How sure are we? that these things are going to work. And actually, given that this process in Rwanda took a bit longer than expected, it was, somehow discouraging because was as written earlier, it was something to be done in six to one year and still done, but it didn't go that fast. so, the projections that were done, you know, these commercial organizations, they do projections of the sales every year. So, if you don't meet that target that, yeah. It's already a loss. So that is the fact that things don't move to the pace that was expected is really, somehow discouraging. 
 
Interviewer: Do you think that private partners working in laboratory diagnostics in Rwanda have the capacity to participate and deliver on the PPP. Why and why not? 



Respondent: The answer is yes and no. Yes. Why? Because on their product lines, they produce they can put those machines or those solutions in the agreement, but they don't manufacture everything that means if you are to enter in an agreement for the lab, it's good that the scope be limited to what you can offer. And then the remaining part can be sourced elsewhere. My know part of the response is based on that actually, there is no one that can manufacture everything or even if you can manufacture everything, it doesn't mean you are the best in everything. 
So, the scope should define where they are, they're going to be limiting their offer or their services. So, the it's hard to find public health organization or about a company that can cover all the ranges of all the levels of health system. It's very hard if as I was saying, even if you have, variety of products, speed rapid tests point of care, automated machines, semi-automated machine, there is no justification that you want the best in the industry for all those levels. So, if you take one for all, even if he has all, maybe he is better in those big machines, but on the point of care is not the best in the market. That's why I say they're not, they don't have capacity for the PPP in case the scope is wide very wide, but they have the capacity for what they are best for. 


Interviewer: Are you aware of the financial instruments that AHDP is offering? If so, what are they? 

Respondent:  There is a rough estimate I saw on   the page I read the budget 1.25 million dollars, but I think it’s a work-sum that may be divided into different, costs probably not dedicated fully to equipment. There is also oversight management, everything. I don't think it's directly to purchase equipment, but, uh, I think it's divided into portions, but I saw that figure. Okay. It is 76 million and 1.25 million dollars, I think. Yeah. 


Interviewer: Do you think that these financial instrument from AHDP sufficient to incentivize the private sector engagement in the PPP? Why and why not?


Respondent: I think if I was to give my opinion on that money shouldn't purchase equipment, the money should put in place clarity of what is needed in each country participating and how, what is the best or the optimal model that is suitable for each country. Those studies of really defining how the model can be, what type of model is suitable for each country. That's where investment needs to go. Otherwise, the private, these private organizations, even elsewhere, even in Europe, they don't sell them. They have a price, of course, but very few customers can buy them, you place your instrument but shouldn't be allocated to buying equipment’s, probably conducting studies of providing evidences, facilitating sessions of establishing the, the PPP models. Yeah. The oversight, and actually informing a right decision to make wrong for some countries, they may need more than that Because there are some infrastructure upgrades that you may need and countries, some countries may not have the budget for that infrastructure upgrades somewhere.
There is no internet. In some other places, the lab is not convenient. The building probably there is, there is a small extension. You see those other aspects probably to upgrade the level to meet the, the required standard. Otherwise purchasing the machines is not really a good way to go, but creating model investing in creating the sweet model for each country. 


Interviewer: Are private partners interested in taking up the available financial instrument offered by AHDP? Why and why not? 


Respondent: It all depends on how you sold the idea. Cause for these private companies their interest is selling. The primary objective is selling, of course they're called public health organization. It's saving lives, but their mission, the first indicator that they're doing their job is the sell. So, if in that proposal or in that idea, they're seeing how they're going to make their sells, then why not, it's possible. And given that AHDP it's a strong voice because it's looking for on behalf of so many countries it's nothing, partner to, to discuss with. Cause here we are talking about more than five countries. That is a large population. So, it's, so it's actually a kind of pulled procurement, a pulled procurement, like you are taking five countries and you are bringing all their volumes together. You are the suppliers to see if they're interested. I think most of them, they will say I'm coming in. I'm also able I'm also interested in telling you, if, you win a market of five countries, you are yourselves. So, it's really attractive. 


Question 20.
Interviewer: What are or could be the plans in the place to support public sector financing of diagnostics in the future? 

Respondent: Thank you very much, I think in terms of financing, I would say, I will talk about what it could be because, talking about what is in place, why you don't own the those plans. It may be hard. It won't be accurate, but in my opinion, what would be, that kind of public financing we are talking of, sustainability in series of sustainability. So, let’s say, we are partnering with a company that manufactures a certain line of products, but tomorrow or after tomorrow, we need to get to a level where we can make it ourselves. 
That is one aspect of the things we need to make sure there is transfer of technology as part of the PPP. 
Second, the other component of my answer is on the financing, the public financing, let's say, great proportion of the Rwanda are insured through the community-based health finances scheme. So, and everyone to give the contribution, everyone you need to remind him every family to contribute every year, you need to make effort to make sure everyone has contributed. And it's hard to predict how much it'll be. It's just an estimate. And if they're not well mobilized this year, they're not paying, of course there are some that cognizant, uh, people who really value it and can on their own, but some others may need to be pushed. So, in terms of financing, if we could have a different other way of contributing the, um, the, um, health insurance indirectly on the taxes that one pays, everyone pays VAT. 


Question 21.
Interviewer: Is there anything else you would like to discuss about PPP that we have not talked about? 
Respondent: To me the PPP should be stratified, stratified to make sure you take the best in every portion. Otherwise, if the scope is wide there will be some areas where it goes well, some others you don't get the best. 


Interviewer: Thank you very much for your willingness to participate. I have taken you really a very good time for your day. And, as I stated at the beginning, if the PPP move ahead to contracting, we will conduct a second round of interview. And if you agree, we may reach out again in the next few months to schedule another interview with you to see what to capture the new perspective, according to the development. Thank you very much. 
























