Question 1.
Interviewer:  So the first question that we have for you is we want you to describe your involvement in AHDP PPP process?

Respondent: I was not involved at all. Okay. 


Question 2.
Interviewer: So then are you at least a little bit familiar with it later on, maybe you were not involved in the, the process at the beginning since the beginning, but at some point you were somehow informed or attended some meetings about it. 
So we would like to know if you are familiar with the, with it and the discussion that, uh, happened in Rwanda. 

Respondent: No, I think there is no formal engagement that I had in this project. I just hear it from friends who were either who participated or who were involved, but me particularly have not been involved in this process. 

Interviewer: And then do you know if your institutions was involved at some point?

Respondent: It was not. 


Question 3.
Interviewer:  So this you are because you are not involved and your institutions also was not involved. Do you know some of the specifics of this PPP the modality that were discussed during this PPP through the discussions that you had with your friends? 

Respondent: No, only know that it was about the lab and I don't know much about the details of this particular PPP.


Question 5.
Interviewer:  So then, based on the few information that you have, do you know who was involved in this AHDP PPP in this discussion around the design of this new partnership? 

Respondent: Yes. I think one of my other meetings, I met during lunch, my colleagues who were in this PPP meeting. And I remember to have met people from CHAI from, MOH or RBC, and who else I heard about Abbott as well. 

Interviewer:  Then we are still going to go through what you heard about these PPP through different people. 
We want to know if during the discussion you didn't hear about any actors that were trying to propose, for example, opposite direction from the main actors. 

Respondent: No, I don't recall anyone like trying to oppose to that.


Question 6.
Interviewer: And then for the PPP, I think, you know, the context and, you know how, which works in Rwanda
who, which institution would have been ultimately responsible for improving the PPP, especially in the PPP design, once the design is discussed and agreed upon who will be the ultimate institution, be responsible 


Respondent: To me RDB I don't know if they were part of it, but I think it's one of the institution, at least that I know, that has built, has that institutional capacity to analyze the offering in the areas of PPP. Although of course, MOH as main recipient wouldn't have technical details to contribute to, but I think the two, if they worked together, they would do, I don't know if they participated, obviously MOH but I don’t know about RDB. Because I know there is a PPP guideline by RDB and I have we as my institution, the RSSB we have been discussing with RDB on other PPP projects, and I think they have them expertise.


Question 7.
Interviewer: Okay. So do you, are you aware of the different options that were discussed during this PPP especially when they were designing the model, the final model to be adopted? Do you have any information about the potential model that were discussed? 

Respondent: No I didn't take part in this discussion. 


Question 9.
Interviewer: It's good. Okay. So you know, that AHDP is a PPP about lab diagnostic, so really focusing on improving access quality of that while being also afford to the Rwandan population. 
So to your understanding, how will an ideal PPP design accommodate the needs of priority populations? If you look at our context in Rwanda, 


Respondent: I think the lab network is something that MOH has been working on to strengthen the lab capacity across from the, from the community health level up to the national level. So I think maybe when I hear PPP I hear more investment in the area and I think more investment means more availability and more quality, wherever there is demand. So I think it's a push into Rwandans already the initiative that Rwanda already had probably to do it faster and more efficiently than if there was no PPP. So I think in that push it means people in remote area areas people with diseases that are not common because you they're always government always focus on what is common and there's always funding for most common diseases, but as, the burden, the epidemiological burden is also changing towards NCDs So I think it's an opportunity to invest in those new areas where,  so I look at beneficiaries in remote areas and people who are economically not well off, but also look at people with specific diseases, these special conditions that would benefit from government investment, if were to wait for the government  to go in to, for its investment plan. 
And, when we talk about access, maybe we can talk us about because what the PPP, I think what I expect from the PPP is also to make,  the availability uninterrupted, because sometimes when it involves equipment, I know government has a challenge in maintenance of the equipment, but if the PPP is can address also that if we have that partner who can also make sure that the document is always there working maintained on time where resource, I think that's also an area that can add value to what government was doing And supply for reagent. Sometimes you can have in another research I went in a health center, they had people recruitment, but with no reagent, they could perform, they couldn't perform, some of the tests they're capable of doing it, but the supply chain was an issue. I think that is also speaks to availability. That is adequate if I may say uninterrupted, not yeah. Cause of supply and maintenance.  

Question 11.
nterviewer: So I'm going to ask you a question, maybe not necessarily tied to what has been done here, you, but based on your knowledge and also of the context of the system.
So what are the factors that you think can change the discussion around the PPP especially in terms of when we're working on a design of a PPP, what are the factors that we should really pay attention to? Cause they can change the model that we're going to implement.  

Respondent:  I think that's the point I wanted to make is the financial viability. And I'm saying this from another experience  so the financial viability of the PPP itself, which means are the services we are providing affordable and are the inputs that are required to deliver the services are they covered by what we get from the, I don't know, from the fees that we charge. So the financial variability, but also affordability can the brand population either out of pocket or through the insurance. Cause you know how much they contribute, something can be of good quality but not affordable. So I think  that is something to look at, to look what is the long term financing of this PPP because for five years you can come with the grant, you can come with a commitment from the company, but in the wrong run should be absorbed by the existing system. So which means people can afford it and if they can afford it also organizations that are managing the PPP can also be viable. The PPP is not causing any loss for a hospital for a private I don't know, I not public or private hospitals that are involved. I don’t know if private is involved, but I think that's very key.

Interviewer: It was mainly, looking at first of all, the public sectors, improving what the services are in the public sector. 

Question 13.
Interviewer: So, here we have the next set of questions, me looking at how the policy context and the different stakeholders can shape the PPP design. So the question is about, the legal system in place in country. And how is it supportive, to the PPP when you look at the existing policy legal and regulatory framework that we have in Rwanda 


Respondent: I think Rwanda as part of the countries efforts to be the destinations, the distinction for most of investments, I think there is an improvement on the policy and the regulatory framework with the ease of doing business, ease of getting in touch with the public sector. If you want to engage in the people I can't talk from the other experiences that RDB is facilitating all these discussions. There is a steering committee. I don’t how many ministers involved in the steering committee for PPP? There is a guideline, corruption is solo. I don't know on their improvements that are intended to attract investment, which I think are also valid for PPP. What I think that is not yet there is the mindset because when something is new know there are always, skepticism, particularly in the public sector, when they have not seen things work, effectively, there are always some skepticism. 
People think there is a hidden agenda by the investor. Maybe the investor is having a selfish agenda at the expense of the public sector. Maybe they know more and they can trick us. Maybe they're looking for short term gains and leaving us in a crisis. Maybe it's not giving us room to choose the best. Maybe the investors, not the best among the investors. And we are committing to one brand while there is innovation outside there that if you commit five, 10 years, it means you give you give up. Or I think there are a lot of reasons for skepticism which I think can be addressed by, I think a lot strengthening our capacity to know that we are capable for other country of choosing the best and committing to what is what is not against the availability of services and also awareness because people in that, when you go in RDB I know the awareness is higher than when you go to MOH or to other ministry implement agencies. That's where I think we need to share that awareness across public institutions that are interest in this, to know that it works in other areas, for example, it have worked in other Settings.


Interviewer:  So meaning you are suggesting that you are saying, first of all that people have a different mindset and we may face challenges and resistance yes. From players and in Rwanda, we're not necessarily into AHDP, but in PPP arrangement in general, and  to try to address these resistance, it's going to be good to share like examples or experiences across different sectors to show that PPP can work. It's not necessarily the devil. It can work and can get good outcomes out of it. 

Respondent: I think so. 

Question 14.
Interviewer: So can you then based on your experiences, so what are the projects that have been there in country that can provide lessons to these AHDP PPP? 


Respondent: Yes. I think in the health sector, particularly, I can think of in the health sector in general. Yeah. Can think of health post with the different stakeholders, one family health, SFH and individual investor. Well,  if I call them investor who are managing, running the facilities, the health post, I think there was a project between MOH, Eco bank  and full and one family health have to open 500 health post, although they are not yet there, but that's a very good example. That's where I was taking the example of working well on numbers, I think on very good financial projections, because I think some of them are failing because of that. When you take one random health post, you might realize it is viable, but there are some that are by nature will not be viable. Because there are two remote, very few people, but the cost running the facility is almost the same. 
So I think there are others that are thriving but those realities, if people were deep in analyzing specificities of each of the health post and doing that detailed financial analysis before I think that would solve some of the problems that we see. That's the only example I remember there are discussions between us and RDB about ambulance, but we have not reached far just because we had that analysis done before. So many investors come, when they look at their numbers, how much we reimburse they realize it's not enough. So that's also, it's adding on that lesson that we should have that long term thinking who will reimburse, who will fund this.  

Interviewer: So you didn't move on with that ambulance project? 

Respondent: We're now discussing the third investor. Now everyone started, we give them the same numbers. It seems we are paying almost a third of what we should be paying per kilometer of ambulance if it was to be a run by a private investor. So it means there are subsidies, obviously that's what we need. And we need to have that very clear.


Interviewer: How was the collaboration, the relationship between public and private especially, for example, if you look at the one that actually worked okay implemented with the health post, with OFH and SFH?

Respondent: I think it was a very good one. They both public and private have a very clear interest in the project. The public wanted the rollout of, of post everywhere. We are far from reaching the target to have at least one post per sell which So, and the investor also wanted to make this work to show and to learn from Rwanda's experience, but be able to expand in other context, in other African countries, mainly African. So I think collaboration and Eco bank has the source of funding was also collaborative in a way. So what I think was, is lacking now is to keep an eye on the, on how the project is being run, because we should have had KPIs to follow, to make sure that this is working according to our expectation. I think we can up only one, which is how many health posts that are open, but how many are financial viable? That is mobile. And yeah, so we'll start, we have now started seeing a trend of reduction. So we have more health post-closing than new health post opening. Yeah. Just cause we did not face that reality. 


Question 15.
Interviewer: So then what has been the historic investment and interest from government in lab diagnostic?

Respondent: Yeah I think government has been keen in investing in the lab diagnostic and of course with the support of partners, including the global fund USAID, others as I was saying in the beginning there have been investment across all the lab networks how do you, they refer from one level to another, how, what is the required capacity, according to the disease, but the package of services that are available there. And they have even gone up to the community health level with those rapid diagnostic test. So I think investment have been there having it was think it was an institution at one point and referral lab having the institution in charge. Now I think a division or something below a division, but is still like government throwing that this is an area that they need to keep strengthening over time. I can't tell how much there was a time. I was able to tell when I was in the ministry but the investments were there, but there was always a shortfall in building maintenance capacity. That's what I think was there is a challenge and monitoring quality of the diagnostics that.

Question 16.
Interviewer: So looking at AHDP, you know, a little bit about AHDP what is the goal of the AHDP? So according to you who are the key stakeholders that should sit around the table when they're discussing AHDP PPP?


Respondent: Yes. I think of obviously that there are two that I talked about already RDB because of their technical skills in analyzing and appraising PPP proposals, ministry of health and RBC, of course all are freight RS, mainly RBC is a technical stakeholder that is benefiting from this In partners, it doesn't matter as long as they bring in capacity and facilitating that discussion, but public institution, those are the one I can also add. RSSB they're always not because I'm from RSSB, but because they're always discussions, that exclude or assess me in the end, whereas you should have included or assess me in the beginning, because when you're projecting, how much you will charge per test, you need to think about who will be paying, who will be paying and because who will be paying also bring another perspective where will be the source of that funding. 
So you can expect to have a good quality problem. You need to pay thousand per test but we know how much contribution we receive. We know how much subsidies we receive, we can't afford. So you can tell you, this is not feasible. The example I was giving with ambulance. So I think if we're not brought into the discussion, people would have put numbers and they concluded they not do PPP. So I think it, should be the same for the diagnostic PPP to bring in the insurance sector, generally speaking, so that we have that consideration of the source of funding. You can have a very good financial model, but as long as you don't know, you are not sure of the source of funding then it'll not work. Health facilities as the primary beneficiaries should be involved too.


Interviewer: So then how does these different these different stakeholders that you have listed, how do they perceive their advantages and disadvantages of the PPP?


Respondent: I think those particular institutions have particular interest and they look, I guess they look at the PPP in length of their own interests. So RDB wants to bring in investments in the country, MOH wants, more accessibility of their lab capacity and health facilities want a very good level that is responding to the treatment plan that they have. And adding RSSB, also interested, knowing what are people expecting from us in terms of reimbursing the services? Are we talking about new services? Are we talking about new lab tests new, different way of testing, same way of testing with more cost or less cost would, that would be of interest for us, if you can achieve more with less cost and I think yeah, they would be interested and it's good to bring all these perspective  on one table. So that as a country we see what is at hand. So somehow all of them are, have incentives to participate I think so.


Question 17.
Interviewer:  So, and then whose interest are helped or hurt by laboratory diagnostics happening in the public versus the private sector? 


Respondent:  Very complicated. I think public has much more interest, because there are some inefficiencies that are public sector is always prone to have those, some inefficiencies that PPP can address. So when you are engaging in other provider even if, they're bringing, I don't know what they're bringing equipment consumables because the public interest is always overshadowing the business part of the model. So I think when you bring them together, public sector will benefit much more while in the private sector. If I was known of private clinic, I can't allow my equipment to sleep for one year, just because, there is no maintenance. I have a ways of addressing my issues already. So I think public will benefit more from PPP than private sector, but definitely on the investment.  I think private sector also benefit from that joint venture, because , it can allow you to expand faster because there's someone's taking charge of part of the cost and,  with and being reimbursed through. So for example, if I was to invest 1 million in, so my lab capacity in have a venture with a private company doing it for me, I can use that money to open another service and yeah, it can help private sector to expand faster. 

Interviewer:  So then this is the next question who is potentially threatened by the PPP, especially here in Rwanda what if we work, we come up with this PPPs design where we are bringing the public sector with the expertise of the private sector and doing this joint venture to improve the public sector, like diagnostic network. So who is going to potentially be threatened? 


Respondent: I don't see anyone who will be threatened 

Interviewer: Or in organization or any? 

Respondent:  Maybe yes. Maybe there were in the that value chain  in that supply chain, there were private organization that were involved for  example supplying, uh, some of the consumables for the lab. And they were of course benefit from that, those ones. Uh, if, if we are talking about a big, uh, manufacturing company, the role is prefer they have large supply network to they, they can't, they can't outsource, but I guess they will, they will not outsource because they rely on their own on their own supply chain. And because there is no particular value addition, the role is all, so try to minimize the cost of supply. So that's why that can push them to use their own services. So I think those are the only ones that will be losing from this. 
Probably there are bureaucrats that were benefiting from inefficiencies. That is a reality outside there. So if there is an equipment you buy, it was supposed to last three years, it is within 12 months, it is not working for every tender. If you are getting a certain percentage, you always rather have a lot of nonfunctional equipment sleeping somewhere because you are buying the new every time or you are reactant in doing that particular maintenance just because you want. So I was thinking about those two groups, people who were involved in the supply chain and some bureaucrats that to benefit from inefficiencies, otherwise the key stakeholders, government and the investor should benefit from the PPP. 

Interviewer: Could we say that those are going to be the most the people are benefiting the most from this public private partnership. 


Respondent: So if I didn't read the proposal and I don't understand the sector, I can't judge, or of course public sector has interest but also private investors have their own interest. So in if, you know, and there is a cost to that interest. So if government was not strong enough to defend, to at least minimize the cost of that increased lab capacity and quality, so constant quality of the services, you can get it, but  at a very high cost. So, I can't judge, if I didn't understand where the proposal and what was in, you can get really that investment you can get good quality lab services, but it can come at a very huge cost if they didn't negotiate well but if they negotiated well, and if they realize that it's too costly, if they were the ones to do that investment, given their capability, the maintenance and whatever, if there was two cost three for them, then it's a good deal for the government. So I can't judge and I can't put in numbers what the population is benefiting because I don’t know if that means more availability  then  the societal gains are also at, uh, they need to be accounted into who is gain and who is just losing. And I think government will do make some compromise just to make the services available services of good quality available. Cause the health of the population also matters. 


Question 19.
Interviewer:  So how interested are private partners you think in participating in PPP like this large, AHDP PPP especially in our context? 

Respondent: I think there are a lot of elements to consider. So I don't know, I was not part of this. And I gave you one example of one other expression of interest that was launched by the government and only one applicant was available. But I think there is one that is very key to determine how people are interested. Even that particular applicant was the one who had full information about the PPP so I think you can judge that people are not interested if they have access to this information. If you have done Fe visibility, you have shown them the numbers and put that expression of interest outside, then you will see how many are interested, if numbers were good. So financial projections risk analysis, if that is done and available to everyone, then I think there are other elements in the environment that will push people, attract people, the ecosystem. When you look at it that there is more attraction of investors in Rwanda, So not coming doesn't mean that they don't like the investing in Rwanda it's maybe because they don't know, they don't have enough information, to make those decisions.                             Otherwise, when you look at the doing business they, the efforts that are, RDB is doing  to give incentive to investors, if you add it to a good model  that  you present to them when you publish the expression of interest, then people, I suspect that people would come in numbers. 


Interviewer: So, so you mean that people, if they're not coming is because they may not have all the necessary information  so what are then these information that they may need, they want to know to have to be attracted?


Respondent: I think, One is the financial variability of a particular PPP the risk analysis and the government so the incentives by the government because there is so you can, the incentives in many ways in terms of success, in terms of I don't know. So if you, we are very clear that government is ready to give away these incentives. And this is the financial model. This is, if you're talking about lab test, for example, capacity, these are the millions of Rwandans, receiving a test of malaria a year, and this is part of the PPP, then people can judge, and of course, that incentive, those incentives that Rwanda gives to investors, for example, in terms of tax, in terms of land tax is to land access to, to whatever exclusivity in contracting, how many years I think every investor would do would look at it. So I think those are the elements that should be public and for people to judge, whether they go in okay. 

Interviewer:  What are the big you have listed some of the incentives, what are then the drawbacks for a private partner? What are some of the drawbacks that may hinder the participation of these partners? 
Like something that will be like a red light to them? No I'm not going to participate. 


Respondent: I'm trying to think aloud. I think they're also interested in stability and we have not seen cases where government have not founded its promises in terms of, for the investments. So in other context, we might find, you have signed an agreement with the government when there is the next government it's, it becomes Absolute and or they make you in a way or another, cause they didn't, they were not part of the deal. They find reasons to make you lose so that you go by yourself. Because also the cost of stopping the contract is very high. Many investors put that. So I think they have stability. What can prevent them from coming? I think the most element that in my knowledge that can hinder engaging engagement of private investors in the PPP is the capacity to and it is within the financial model. 
I was talking about the capacity to reimburse So, I think in Rwanda, the total expenditure per capital is low health expenditure. So it's in relative terms as part of GDP. I think it's one of the best, but, when you put in numbers, dollars per capital is very law. And when you're talking about lab where you need to source almost everything from outside , so it doesn't mean  you can cut the cost on human resources, on resources that you have as a country, but resources that you need to bring from outside. There's no way you cut the cost so I think the affordability, so, how much is the country able to reimburse some of these subsidies they're bringing that's number one threat to those investors. I've had an interaction, recently a private company that works in Zimbabwe, and one doctor was asking me, what is the cost of consultation by a specialist here? I was telling him between 10, $15. He was telling me it is a hundred dollars for me in Zimbabwe. So that was the end of the discussion. 


Interviewer: So, and then do you think that the private partners that we have here in working in lab do you think that they have the capacity to participate and deliver on a PPP? Especially when we are looking at the PPP the PPP that AHDP was looking at was really something that is big, where, uh, could move from just doing sample transportation to something that is like co-management of lab network. 


Respondent: We don't have many, but few that we have, I think they have the capacity because they are, many of them have international collaborations, which is in addition to their capacity. so some of them either are a hundred percent Rwandan, but with international collaboration, others are the branches of big private lab farms, which I think is even when you look at their capacity in with that extension  I think they have at least more capacity the public in that regards. 

Interviewer: So do you think that private partners that we have in the country will be interested in taking up the, this available financial instrument offered by AHDP? 

Respondent: I can't tell cause of two factors that I don't have one the loan they are offering is it better than the banks secondly, do they need that money? For example, if we are talking about those agencies of multilateral lab companies, probably they have more money, from the mother companies than they're not willing to incur any long cost. So since I don't have those two elements, I don't know if this is, interesting for them, but of course, if, if it was cheaper than the market and there is that need, then they would be willing to take it, but I can't speak on the need. I think there is a need capacity still low and, we are still sending some lab test outside in the country so it means there is room to improve capacity in the country.

Interviewer: So these financial instruments may somehow, I don't know, good incentives to them, maybe to participate?

Respondent: If they don't have their money and if it is better than the banks. Okay. 

Question 20.

Interviewer: So now this last question is about sustainability and scale up. So especially looking at, the public sector financing. 
 What are, could be the plans in place to support public sector financing of diagnostics in the future? Especially for lab?



Respondent: I think there are two ways to stream of financing and one is through health insurance, but knowing that the community, the insurance is the biggest, insurance in the country. And we know that it is financially. It’s not very strong because they have very low contributions, which are not likely to increase, can increase only through government subsidies. So, the key elements to the sustainability is of course there is that minimum that is provided for, to everyone who is using. So at least the utilization of services is high and to remain high because majority of the population is insured and lab testing will be part of the care that they receive when you go to health facilities. So that is I think a very strong element for sustainability, but secondly, another element, which I don't master, but was very key is, the second,  financing stream, which is through the government budget government has been investing in for example, biomedical equipment. 
And I think they will have continue that way because what insurances are reimbursing, particularly community based health insurance. What we are paying is not doesn't affect necessarily the true cost of running the services. I can't tell about the lab particularly, but globally what reimburse to the facilities, they need other subsidies to complement for them to provide the services because there's no study that is particular to lab to confirm that statement. So if those, for the insurance, they will continue and government has to continue as well.
And in this large, in this perspective of improving access to lab and improving quality efficiency, do you think that  the financing plans that are  in place, the one that you have talked about, do you think that these are sustainable are going to be sustainable? And the under AHDP PPP, 
If we have a public private partnership in place, what are the element that we should really make sure that we pay attention to, to make sure that this is going to be sustainable and scalable? at the end, 


Respondent: I think the one part of sustainability is that financing since this government budget, I don't think that what goes through the government budget. I don't think that we stop tomorrow and members will not stop paying their contributions. So insurance is a sustainable way of having these services run. So now what can threaten the sustainability is the cost of running the lab. Since I have not looked at the model, if it is reasonable enough for the public and private operators, not to lose through providing this service, just because insurance didn't pay didn't reimburse enough. So if that is guaranteed, then there is no other threat to sustainability. So we have to the costing model if it respected the affordability part of it sustainability would be guaranteed. 
So giving an example of that ambulance project, I was talking about when they did the costing, they realized that we should be paying three times per kilometer, what we pay now. So lowering it in advance and making sure that two third will come from government subsidy will come from here. And then if that is taken care of then sustainability then, but if we were to go ahead and sign, that contract will not increase what to reimburse and the operator will lose the next day. So I think this applies to the lab as well, and the operator in this project, I guess these are labs in public and private health facilities. If there are operating at loss, probably they are currently operating at loss. I have no idea, but if the PPP is worsening the situation, then someone should be worried.
We need really to make sure that what we are proposing is affordable. To be realistic of available funds.  If not, it's not going to be sustainable.









