Question1.
Interviewer:  So, wanted just to know what was your involvement in PPP Process under AHDP program, in Rwanda? I'm sure you know about that.

Respondent: Yeah. So, my involvement came late. After the passing of Sydney, our former country director of CHAI and she was the one who was leading on that project. And because I was taking over all the technical lead of the projects in the office. I was requested to take the lead on that. I had heard a few of the presentations before I had, you know, been involved in asking some of the key questions I wasn't yet fully on boarded at that time. And so, when I was tasked to take over, you know, technical support for that program, that's when I really sat down to understand it.
And then my involvement was to try and figure out the balance the link. The alignment between what government would like to do what partners are trying to do as well and what CHAI’s position would be, because it was quite complex. And I think the biggest thing was because of all the changes in leadership. You know the way the project started and how long it had taken. I think there were challenges because of you know continuity, from the beginning, and the new leadership that was coming in so it was a constant COVID Start stop. And I think that's where really my role came in to figure out, you know, where do we go at that point in time, and how do we move it forward.


Interviewer:  when this project started did it started before COVID during or after COVID was it started with former minister of Health, or it was with current Minister of Health? 


Respondent: It started with a former minister of Health and it started before COVID and I think the vision at that time was really to improve the labs. Overall, so it was a very holistic approach to improve it. And I think your question is interesting because pre COVID the issues were a little different. The focus on labs was little different, the financing in labs was very different, during COVID we started having a lot of attention on labs, not comprehensive, but still there was quite a lot of attention on investment and people started seeing the importance of labs. And then there was also the code drive I'm not sure when the decentralization of labs started.  But I think that also affected you know the project as well so there's so many reforms that happened during the process of getting this project kicked off but when it started it was clearly agreed that it was going to be a look at how to holistic and improve lab services, such as your fast turnaround times you have quality lab services, and it's done. 
I think for me the biggest pool was the, the cost effectiveness and quality so that was the goal. And the, it was very hard to explain, even for me to understand. It took a lot of time, because one I'm not a labs person. Originally, but I'm a finance person help financing.  So, it took a lot of time for me to understand the different components that it takes to holistically improve labs. So, I think when the COVID started, and then the change in leadership, you know, those were little changes that came up that now you know people ended up picking what they wanted to pick from the project and leaving some pieces out and I think that that made it a challenge, you know, the stuck and stops but yes it started way back with the former minister.

Interviewer: Back in 2019 or 2018?


Respondent: I think 2018.  And the process in CHAI, because this was something that was very big for IRA, not only IRA, but, you know, the CHAI Africa program. There are many countries that were pulled into this piece of work, beyond Rwanda. And so, you know if your peer Ghana, Kenya. Rwanda. And so, it was seen as a really big drive to improve labs in more than one country, and the countries that were selected for, you know for very strong reasons why the size of some countries to the progress of some countries. Due to the financing the opportunity for success, the chance that this could actually succeed because countries were ready for some of these reforms and you know the interest of the leadership in each of the countries.


Question3. 
Interviewer:  If you allow me to go to the next question on.What was the process of negotiation over PPP, on this one so we're looking at the negotiation process how the health facility was selected, and how did it start and from your knowledge. What is the status of today?


Respondent: Okay. I don't have the current status, but I can talk about the part that I was aware of. I know that the assignment was given to the planning department. And for me, I feel like that because planning department handles PPP, but I feel like that was part of an error. Because if it would have given to the lab department directly to the lab team, they could have developed it in a manner they understand what really needs to be done and they could have been taken along from the beginning. So, to put that Dozier in the planning department, I understand where it came from, but it was a limitation as well.
So, on one hand I saw CHAI spending a lot of time explaining to the planning department what this is what it's going to do how it can help. Whereas when it was explained to the lab team, they quickly understood what it was and how it could help.
Now the components that I understood.  There was an element of equipment and an equipment is interesting because I really appreciated through the research that when you have different pieces of equipment with different reagents one Rwanda has helped financing through the health insurance scheme. And I remember someone in RSSB be asking us you know I'm struggling with pricing for lab diagnostics, because each hospital has different machines different reagents you cannot have a unit cost, costing done. And so, the lab tariffs. One, they agreed with their lower than they should be. But it was very difficult for us, even as a whole finance team to help them improve them, because it meant now looking at each and every piece of equipment and starting from them. And that's something that the one the labs could look at you know from the financing angle and we'll look at how to strengthen equipment procurement and purchasing standardize it a little bit, understand the region needs you know, even if it's not one machine. But to try and streamline that process of how equipment is procured for labs in country, and how diagnostics I decided on, which is also a you know decision process for cost effectiveness analysis. So that was one and we didn't go very far on that because we thought that this PPP process now could help to build that out because if you have private sector coming in, they're very strong and costing because, ultimately, the profits are very important. So, we didn't move that piece very far because of that. 
The other piece that was very interesting was the training, because it was a clear gap. And there were multiple aspects around the training. On one hand, when it was presented, it felt as if PPP is now going to come in and all the lab will go to a private entity and some people had that impression.
So, I think there was also a mistake on our part on how we presented in the beginning, especially because once people are thrown off in the beginning, it's very difficult to, to come back around again and so I think that was a bit of the hesitancy we slammed at the beginning because of that failure to really explain it very simply, too many people were involved. So, the second piece was around the opportunity for improving the quality and the turnaround time of the lab process and results by training stuff, you know, in partnership with private with private entities with private stuff as well.
So that was, that was the second piece of element that I thought would be really powerful because at the end of the day, what was agreed is that it's one thing and this is the third part which I missed was the How do you ensure that the test, go to a central lab quickly, and you know the test is done and then the results are sent by quickly, what I saw with COVID the way the testing of COVID was done and this is something that the ministry really appreciated was because of how quickly Rwanda was able to turn around. COVID results. There was an opportunity to replicate that in other labs, and there was an understanding now that okay, it's not enough for the test to just go to the lab, it has to come back and the doctor has things interpreted.
So, I think we did a big favor for in that element of understanding the process and the quality and the importance of good quality that you know diagnostic results. And so, the second piece was around how do you ensure that the test, go to where they can be tested. And then they returned on time. And how do you ensure, not just go and come back but the quality of what the test is being done is improved. Not that it's done but it can be improved and it can be more cost effective.
So, by looking at all those components, this is what the PPP was intended to, to build out on have one big system have one system that looks at all the different elements because if you look at them piecemeal, you won’t get the savings that you'd like you won't get the big improvements that you like. It may be difficult, but, you know, it's something that needs to be really well planned out. And because of that, I think CHAI was very willing to take whatever time government wanted, whatever analytics government wanted to get that done.
So, when I joined again, CHAI Rwanda I remember they were doing. They were finishing up an assessment of the health facilities to see what it was a very big assessment. It looked at what lab equipment the facilities have. It looked at the stuff being looked at the costs, looked at so many things, the gaps. You know even things like electricity power. And I think much really nicely with the optimization study that was being done undefined because that study was not helping to figure out where, you know what, what's the most optimal route for testing diagnostic services, you know, picking up the test them sending them back. And so, I think that one piece, plus equipment plus the training of health workers and then the quality of the work that's actually done provided a good timing. So, the process after they did that big analysis, they presented the results. Now, for the full year almost they were presenting itself. And I think the challenge was the COVID start and stop as well, because the lab team was so busy with the COVID. We saw a lot of the money that you know we were spending in trying for example, and anything that was diverted to covert going towards labs to really support them, because we were as CHAI we didn't want to just come in, just for PPP, we wanted to understand the problems and really help build what government would like. So, I think that kind of diverted the process a little bit of a delay the process quite substantially. And then when things settle down a little bit again, the process again started again.
So, when in February 2021 you know, we had had. by the end of, 2020 there have been a big outbreak. So, we started picking up again and we had team members coming in from the global team to start picking this up again and we started discussing with the position with RDB as well.
The advantage that we have had with RDB is that we're just done the oxygen PPP work. And there was a big appetite by RDB, to figure out where can we have private sector engagement in the health sector, how do we design it, and how can the Ministry of Health come to us, it shouldn't be any partner, it should be the Ministry Health approaching RDB for partnership. But our role was to help you know sensitize them, help them understand the detailed questions, they'll come back with questions we're improving. Some we didn't have answers too. But I think that was good because when the Ministry of Health, organized, those meetings, and they invited RDB, you know, RBD was very much, you know, on board, and it was easy for them to pick on I'm not saying that you know ministry didn't have their own conversations and others but I think this added as well and it helped.
So, there were PPP meetings as well. And the Minister of Health has a separate PPP technical working group all together. And so, there were two pieces that we thought would be great for them to showcase or pick up on, and one was the oxygen one of course, I think they had a broader PPP framework as well but let those working is working on, and then the PPP for the lab. So, there was a process of technical working groups with that information was presented, there was a meeting, I think somewhere in you know out of Kigali, where core group of ministry official than you know relevant stakeholders were invited and that was presented a final report was prepared and sent to the Minister, after a couple of months it took a while again because of all these issues, the Minister called for meeting. And at that meeting, you know, it was. He really pushed us, and programs that we need to do that entire piece, or do we pick up elements, and stuck with elements, and then take it from there.  So, I think at that meeting we kind of, he said he tasked the teams to go back and think through that. But there was more of a focus around starting with the sample transportation and having a PPP with the transportation, first before doing the bigger picture. But there was still an opportunity to present both because the question you posed as well as you know what's the point of having the, just get to the lab, and then they're not you know they don't we don't get good results. So, he tells the team to really think which one which I think was great because we interested his team. He believes in the team and so on.
So, during that process of going back and looking back because the numbers were there, I don't think there's much to change when if we, we went back to the field we will probably find the same because it was a very expensive. So, we had a meeting as well. When did you stop by that time, and the head of the labs team who was new, and what they told us at that point was, you know, please, don't we have all these reforms that are going on? The lab leader was very new, and I think he wanted a chance to also figure things out and you know do is do something based on what his assignment was. So, he took us through the reforms that were going on. And at that point we had no idea about some of them.  So, it was news, which was unfortunate, because then we wouldn't have pushed certain things too hard or too much, or we would have adjusted a little bit, but it was also good because it was a very open conversation very honest, where he said you know we're trying out a couple of things I can't quite remember all of them. I know that optimization was one of them, of the roots. So, he said we're trying out a few things why don't you give us some time to see how this can work. And then we come back with to the PPP conversation. So, I think it was the way he explained it he said it's a question of timing. And that was my understanding and, you know, that makes perfect sense if someone if a government is not ready, and would like to first take a bite size, at some of the reforms, see how they come out and then come back and revisit the conversation. I think the work is not wasted. It just needs to be put on pause and let the process, you know, respect the process and trust the process as well.
So that is where I left it. I don't know what the update has been since then but I'll pause there.


Interviewer: Wow. Thank you so much, I can't believe it.In the reports that you give, were you also be able to as you said, COVID has disrupted maybe also improved the lab systems.
In a way, independently PPP how that was actually embedded within the designing of the feasibility study with everything, and also question also of understanding, you know, once they propose this position Did it happen at all or composition just stop when they presented the way of their way the point of view of improving lab systems.


Respondent: so, I think, COVID opened up minds, a lot on the importance of lab, and gave it very good attention. I think a lot of times it's taken for granted. Whether it's the COVID process, help to improve the general lab services I cannot answer with certainty.  I cannot say that a lot of efforts were diverted towards handling the situation. So, I don't know if that was a plus or minus. I'm, I can say that the lessons that were learned. if they were if they are implemented is awakening strength of the system. So, lessons around you know the use of IT based on technology, SMS services.
The challenge is, it was so it's not a natural experiment, it was so intensive so resource heavy. And I don't know if those kinds of resources would be available, more broadly speaking, we did a quick analysis as well to show the type of tests that are done when we're looking at the PPP what are so we considering because there's so many tests that are available. And we had a very nice summer I remember, I'm not going to try and attempt to repeat, you know, verbatim what they were. But they were a lot of tests and we also looked at what is the high volume, you have the ones that are high volume at what levels of care, where they are needed as well.
So, when you look at it, and I think this is the big issue when you look at one test, if you're just looking at HIV. It's easy. By looking at COVID It's easy to fix. But when you're looking at the broad lab system. And what we have to remember is the broader lab system what proportion of patients. of the population, does it cover.  In terms of the health system so when you fix the broader health labs system, and you look at the lab tests we're doing. Those are the diseases that affect, most of the 80% of the diseases that affect the broader population. So, they're quite broad. And I'm not even talking about tertiary so much. This is really primary health care a lot of. So, I think, I think we didn't have a chance to now, you know, does have a discussion, you know, building on the COVID piece on the fact that this is an opportunity to scale, those gains, it was mentioned, but we didn't go to the linkage in very much detail at least the time I was there maybe after the, they did.  The other thing that I would say is that, I mean it was a very positive thing. It gave a lot of positive energy too, to see how much improvement the labs could make in such a short time, to see how they could actually deliver results in such a short time, it gets very good energy. Also, the fact that labs of being a focus, I felt like the energy was very positive, you know, to see how donors and partners also now starting to invest in reagents and you know make sure the region's come in on time the equipment. So, I think it gives a very positive energy. And, you know, I think there was also the piece of about the work that Abbott was doing.  And I haven't talked about that because I don't know the full story around Abbott. What I do know that when, when CHAI came in, it was to support Abbott and kind of help, you know, build that out further support. I'm not sure why the two teams didn't merge to have one PPP get think it's because I was looking at very specific equipment. Whereas, you know this broader PPP was looking at new. That's my understanding, but don't quote me on that because I am really not sure why the two didn't align.
So, I'm not sure why the two teams didn't quite align and build, because I think that would have also been a good opportunity to move together further strongly. 
 
Question 4.
Interviewer: Interesting. I have a really many questions with responded already, but I'll just go get to one on. 
What were the sticking point around the PPP design, and how they were resolved? What else do you think apart from what you said already?

Respondent: Okay.  I think I've mentioned some but I'll try and see if I can pick up some other ones. I know there was this big project to build a national lab. So, I think, I think the fact that was being done in a silo. and it was a very big investment, I think that was a sticky point. I think there were projects going on but in silos. And I think we were not able to show that this piece of work connects, everybody. So, I don't think all the stakeholders were brought together on the table. I think, for PPP like this. And I keep comparing it with oxygen, because oxygen is smaller. Oxygen had its really use the PSA plants in Rwanda, mainly at public facilities. You have only two or three private providers but Labs is very different.
So, I don't think all the stakeholders for lab were brought on the table. So, there were a lot of silence. Even COVID being one silo and it's even the fact that some of the reforms that are being developed or outside the PPP conversation. And again, for me, I think it's because the deal was placed in the planning department, instead of the lab department so the lab kept having so many pieces that are moving that the planning team maybe didn't necessarily have been, you know, fingerprint on. I know that some and let me tell you to talk a lot to the labs team, a lot, you're always there. But somehow, you know some of these pieces. You know we slipped because I don't think that it was viewed as a overall opportunity to improve labs, overall, I think in trying to understand you end up. Zooming in into the area that you're interested in, always feel like the government challenge. So, I think that's coupled together with the changes in leadership, and then the COVID stops and starts with a word big challenge. And then like I said before, the way we presented it made it seem as if we're privatizing labs in hospitals, which was, you know, a big challenge to address afterwards I think presentation of the opportunity, it needed a lot of time and not everyone had that much time to sit and really understand it so I think towards the NBA able to simplify it a little bit, but it was too much too late and little bit And then there was an opportunity to do components of the PPP, and not the whole PPP as a whole. But I think people were divided on the approach to take moving forward.
I think those would be the main areas that I think siloed reforms, different moving Stakeholders not all on the table together from the get go to build this thing out. And I think what we did to try and resolve that again was a lot of discussion but people don't have that much time, especially if you're not bringing something new, what, where's the conversation leading to. And so that needed the leadership of the minister in order to push it forward but we kept going back to get more information so you know it’s understandable because it was a big reform but if we had moved together, strongly agree disagree, you know, and hash it out I think maybe even more which would have been made.
And then the other thing is, I think this really, you know, is a missed opportunity because if you look at it from a business perspective. It has the opportunity to bring in a lot more resources to improve the lab system. And I think it was not because of the way we are in public sector we don't always see the business angle of things. So, ultimately, this was a business deal, you know if we're able to figure out how to do PPP more money would be brought in. In order for us to improve the lab system.
And I think other sticking points were around at where more money will come from, so it was presented as a loan from European Investment Bank So, I mean, even me I was like why should we be getting a loan if you want to help us improve this, you know, let's find resources. Why are you giving me a loan? And I know this is tricky I know this is a recorded interview but it's the reality in a time where we had COVID we had struggling to get the normal GDP. And then we're presenting a PPP in the context of getting additional resources through a loan. So, I think that didn't sit very well, if there was an opportunity for the money to be coming in to be a grant. Or, if we had had deeper conversation on what kind of loan are we talking about is it favorable to the country, you know, went for it, you know is the non-going on into private sector, they don't want supposed to repeat.  I think we're going a bit deeper in that conversation; it was very great. You know I think maybe would have made some progress as well because it seemed like he has a PPP, but the funding has to come from government and I think there was also a big sticking point, who's going to finance it.
Yeah, it was a lot because the way it was presented it's going to it's going to be more expensive to implement one, which is in the beginning. So, if it's going to be more expensive to implement, you know, who's going to finance it can be financed it with existing resources. And then the answer was oh yes but you also have the opportunity to get a loan to fund it. So, you know, if you're not saving up costs, then, you know, that's not going to fly so I think the financing piece was very, like you said, ambiguous.
And I think moving forward. I think if this is another opportunity for PPP that needs to be sorted out but I'll give the oxygen one again with the oxygen one we worked with RDB from the beginning to identify sources of financing for the private sector. In this case we said, the private sector is going to be the one to invest in new PSA plans, they'll build them. And because the government pays through insurance for oxygen consumption. Government will pay for buying the oxygen like they're doing already until the point where they've recovered their costs, and then we'll discuss handover of management and ownership of the PFA plans. So, it was a very clear process. It was built and forget the word build builds and builds. But if you built the private sector builds and managers, then when they recoup the costs, they hand over to the government to, to continue owning and managing the facilities, if government decides that there are elements that like the private sector to continue. They can discuss it at that point so it was very clear for oxygen. But for this one it was not very clear also because there were many moving parts Yeah.


Question 5.
Interviewer:  Who has been involved in the initial design of the PPP? 
Have there been any champion supporting the PPP when you were discussing with different people in the private sector, or any actors trying to oppose different direction?


Respondent: I don't know full visibility, I think the only teams that I really do know whether the government, because those are the teams that I work with, but I know that for example CDC has a lot of investments in labs. I didn't see them fully you know brought on board the Abbott had a lot of, you know, investments there. And I think in the beginning, don't put but as things moved on, I didn't see them on board. I don't know who the main thing is I have the lab space in Rwanda, but just off the top of my head, those are the ones that I felt were really instrumental that are not pulled in.
MOH and MOF I think, I'm not sure how much involvement they had I didn't see that much involvement of Finance. RDB also was the minimum but at least they were pulled into the meetings, the PPP meeting. I think also our society was not involved fully, because I think you know again when it comes to financing. A solution could have been developed together. But I don't have full visibility of all the stakeholders, so I can't answer that question, you know extensively. Yeah. 


Question 6.
Interviewer: who do think that was the ultimately responsible for approving the PPP design and the one you submitted?

Respondent:  I think the PPP would have been submitted to RDB, but it needed to be approved by RBC. I know it's a bit complex but I think, unless RBC approved it, and was fully on board, it wouldn't fly

Interviewer: Things did not move, the way It supposed to move?

Respondent:  I didn’t know if they didn't approve, I think they kind of just said, Wait, you know, just hold on a little bit. For some of the reforms we're trying to implement, to see whether it will achieve certain results, then we can build on the PPP based on that. So, I don't think they said no, I think that's what happened and again for them it was really the financing, where's the money going to come from.

Question 7.
Interviewer: What options were or still being considered when designing the model?

Respondent: I think there were options of that thing with instead of the full model to start with small pieces of the model, I remember the first one being the transportation optimal transportation. Another option was to start with a few places and not the entire country and I think that also was a big, back and forth, because to achieve the full optimum optimization, doing it in a few districts would not achieve the kind of savings that the PPP model could potentially have. So those are the ways that I thought the model was being considered there was the broader picture with the full component or small-scale stuff with transportation improve that and then build it from there. And also, the option of starting a few districts then scale it up, but some colleagues were not very keen on geographical. You know, starting with a few districts and piloting. I think there's also one school of thought that if you do something in Rwanda reading the entire country, which also makes sense. So, I think those are the different model designs and some of the limitation.


Question 8.
Interviewer: How appropriate is the design of AHDP PPP to local context? Do you think it was adopted context, and how disruptive is the PPP to the current system how much change will it require?

Respondent:  That's a tough question. I think when you look at the technical pieces, and where the pool. What the core goal is the bottom line. I think it's a great opportunity. I think they're very it's very complex. Because the different pieces you’ve stated, all play a big part in this. So, for example the diagnostics market. When you do a PPP like this, I'm trying to narrow down the market that you allow, you know, into the space and what basis do you did decide that in order to make it cheaper. You know that that's a complicated one because it's a free market and Rwanda is a small market as well.
So, on one hand, it could play in favor of Rwanda, because if you have. If you have a small market, and you target, good quality diagnostics, and you're able to negotiate a really fair price. You know that could benefit, but on the other hand, if you're not able to negotiate a very strong price you don't allow other competing markets to play a role. And because it's a small market. The demand is small, you do need many players in order to push the price down so it needs a very strong negotiation, strength and skill. And so, I think each of these points you've raised could play two ways. We know that the diagnostic and pharmaceutical space is very political globally as well. So, depending on who and a very, very vicious marketers as well. And they approach politicians as well, saving this that will be, you know, dilemma dynamics as well. I think this could have presented a good opportunity to show how Rwanda streamlines entry into the Rwandan market for diagnostics.
I think one really strong example that I like is the one in New Zealand. If you look at how they allow entry of drugs and diagnostics into their system they have a very strong system, which is really nice to study. And so, this could have presented that opportunity to the diagnostic market to make it more open, more regulated as well which is the direction Rwanda is moving towards. So, in terms of appropriateness I think, I think, you know, I don't want to say it's not a black or white answer. I think it's a bit gray. And it depends on how it’s shaped and it requires a lot of discussions on each and every one of those elements as you move along to get to a point where you decide as a country this is how we want to move forward.
Another quick example is you're saying that you want to, when you bring in PPP. Are you going to increase the salaries of the lab technicians, and there was that whole conversation of, you know, the lab salaries were reduced at some point I going to increase them again? So, there's, you know, every single element, equipment, training and each are the reagents the transportation. All of them have different points that just need to be a decision.  So, it can be appropriate. I think for me the big question is, does it lead to actual disruption and improvement.  And I think it, it definitely could have but it has to be done at scale. If you do small pieces. You may not see that improvement you'll just see increased close, but very little progress, whereas if you do it as a comprehensive model.
It definitely has the opportunity to disrupt and approach progressive disruption, you know it's not disruption that will take the systems but once I think the last piece that needed to be clarified in order for that disruption to make sense, we forget that, I think, compared to other countries, 80% of healthcare run is delivered by the public sector. It's not like the private sector. So even the lab services, you know, Lancet it has a role to play, but it's not the majority in my, you know, broad understanding. So, I think that was the angle that may have been inappropriate to call it a PPP. You know, maybe the title itself was offsetting, it's not fully a PPP or not privatizing labs. No, rather it's using private sector to help improve public sector, and get it to a better space of delivering quality lab services. And so, I think that also was a big challenge, calling it up PPP and linking it to financing from a loan from a European Investment Bank. So, I think that element of the financing also was inappropriate. Given the COVID period that we were in as well. And it was very difficult to reconcile people to that, that piece but if we had approached it more from, how can we make sure that the health insurance the money that goes to labs pertain to life. And we figured out solutions from there. And when they adopt then see how to get more resources so let's say CDC could now work on the transportation keys and say CDC is already investing so heavily in optimal transportation can you just expand since you're   not planning to transition out of donor funding, can you come and help us fix this. More broadly, as your transition plan. So, I think that there are other ways in which we could have discussed this instead of saying that funding will come from a loan. And I think that was another piece that was inappropriate. in this particular piece. Yeah.

Interviewer:  That’s really great thank you so let's also follow up on what you just said was, how would you recommend us processes to have in buying for all stakeholders, you know, if you try to read them into international funders or international players, then multilateral organization, bilateral? 

Respondent: Yeah, that's a tough one. You know, I think, if I was to continue it, I would sit at the DG on the head of the head of RBC. I'll sit with them and, you know, figure out with them, how to bring everyone along. That's where I see the opportunities because RBC they are the one in charge of lab ultimately. So, if that's the leading RBC, you know, to understand, you know, to understand what they think are the winds, and then be able to develop the agenda. Based on RBC as a need. And I'm not talking about individual personalities I'm talking about the institutional, you know, the institutions, because Rwanda institutions are strong, it's not an individual thing.
So, it's nothing to do with individuals I think all leaders in their own enough forms and responsibilities are great, but I think by the fact that's the institution that coordinates labs and brings the labs teams together, it would have made more sense for them to drive that process I think that's the only thing I would change a little bit. But I think that the team really tried, they tried to bring on board all the people they thought were relevant. But ultimately who decides, like you asked. In, at the end of the day, and who's going to work at implementing it also need to really drive the shaping of this a bit more, and not just at a technical level, but even the political level of the institution because a lot of this is very political.
It has multiple pieces that a technician may not have all visibility of all the different pieces like you said legal political, you know you didn't even talk about technical in that list that you shared but all those other factors, and the technician not necessarily have that visibility. So, I think both the technical, which, you know, we work very strongly with but also the political leadership in RBC. I think being able to put those two together. And then also I think we should have given this. It's a big project. And I think we should have really made every meeting, big, not too small to move things forward. Yeah.

Interviewer: Who other private companies international founders, that you approach that were interested in this work, or they were not approached at all.


Respondent: I think they were approached by the way that the way that CHAI approached it I think this was our mistake. We approach them just for information on small pieces. I think there's a very strong and again I don't know all of them maybe when you interview them it was Sam, Sam can really tell you because I'm going to each one of them. But the way we approach them as we information, not to bring them along to build something bigger than the other group was. I don't know which, which is the USAID funded project that's working on LMIS. I don't know if it's cut know. There's another, there's another institution that does a lot of work on supply chain as well. So, I think the problem was we went for information not okay let's do this thing together. And I can understand it but it's not CHAI place to do that. And so, I think that's where the broader bigger meetings would have been helpful with all the right people, but I don't have a full extensive list of the private entities that would be relevant. The other piece, I don't know how much FDA would also clear all. But I think that's also a good opportunity. And now, the role that is it CAMERWA, who was doing the work of procurement, CAMERWA. Yeah, I think coming off with some good information, and I think they have this institutional memory that would also help build that up and RSSB for finance piece and Minister of Finance, like you said, so this was really a big thing, but I think we handled it as if it was a technical. Yeah, And I think that was a challenge.


Question 10. 
Interviewer: How would the PPP design address key considerations to improve access of laboratory diagnostics if PPP is proposed? 

Respondent: Yeah, I think it was, and I think that's the advantage of the PPP or AHDP in Rwanda because like I said in the beginning, you know, the 80% of this lab in public facilities, so it already. And in Rwanda I think everyone lives within 20 minutes of the health facility or 30 minutes. So, I think in terms, and then you have the fact that it's paid by insurance. So, Rwanda naturally is designed to ensure quality. So, this project actually was expanding services to those that need it the most and improving the quality of lab, care to them not the higher income can tell, but I think it would be addressing the lower the groups. So, with no question that was naturally designed into the Rwanda design. Yeah.


Interviewer: Which consideration is best served by the current design, which considerations is current receiving the least attention in the current design?

Respondent: So, I think, I think, availability and quality were the ones that were most efficiency. If it was, if it was implemented as a whole. I think those three pieces would be addressed. But I think the biggest push was quality. And in a very simple language I liked how the minister put it he said it's not enough for the test of the blood to be drawn, but you want the results to go quickly, back to the doctor, or the patient has a diagnostic Very simple, but you know, very efficient, and call it as an example. So, I think it addressed a lot of that. I think what wasn't addressed was the affordability.


Question 10.
Interviewer: What factors do you think changed the discussion around the PPP? 

Respondent: Let me see for positive and negative. So, I think negative was the cost and who's going to pay for it. When the analysis was done and it showed it to be more expensive. It just switched off everyone. So, I think not being able to really dig into that affected the discussion negatively. On the positive side. I think the opportunity to improve quality affected it on the positive side. And so, you could see that tug of war we want to stay because it's going to do a lot of good, but then another thing to pay for it and can we afford it. And I remember there was one time we were tasked to go back and look at the cost, again. But you see, I think we didn't have the answers because we're not in a room where finance could give information and you know the right people RSSB who are this be and so on. So, I think that those are the two factors quality for positive and then affordability to the government, especially during COVID it on the negative I'm not seeing where additional money would come from.

Interviewer:  How about the stakeholders as you said that the stakeholders were not all involved, do you think that also could be the reason of the changes?
Respondent: Yeah, I think in but definitely I think in these conversations you have to make sure that incentives Ireland. And so, in this scenario in this process. We didn't even take time to understand the incentives of some of the stakeholders, so if you don't understand the incentive, how can you align to the incentives. So, I think that that was quite a challenge, not understanding, I'd have to know I don't understand from the incentive of Abbott you know, or I wouldn't understand fully CDC is incentive except that eventually the plan to transition. But if you understand their incentive. You can align to it, you know, the government could then have crafted out. You know some strategies to apply to it so I definitely think that that was a challenge. And then you don't know what conversations happen, independently because these are independent, stakeholders, so you don't know what perception they have. It would be interesting when you interview some of them to see what perceptions they had, and whether if they had more information or if they were part of designing and building this, it would have moved further because I think they could clearly have funded certain elements that we discussed it in such a peaceful manner. Again, it was very complex it's a very complex agenda.


Question 12.
Interviewer: If AHDP is providing technical support and facilitating financing for this PPP how the availability of this support affects the PPP design?

Respondent:  I think I would answer two things here. I think the financial instruments proposed by AHDP were inappropriate, they felt very risky.  So, I think they should have been alternatives, a broader range of instruments, whereas here that range of instruments seemed very narrow, at least that was the perception that I had, I could be wrong.  I think the work that was done under AHDP however, like I said, is not wasted because it really on Earthed the opportunities, you know, not just the challenges, but what are the opportunities to improve. And even though the argument is made that you cannot just improve one piece. You have to improve all of it, for there to be progress I think it's opened up, you know, for those who've really internalized the main messages. I think it's really led to some of the workers, you know some of the reforms that that are being implemented I think the one around decentralization and transportation. I know that the lab team have started something on that or they were starting something that it's based on some of these findings, combined with the DNO work as well. So, I think the opportunity, you know, a lot has been Annette, the challenge of the lab. Salaries as well you know that's been on Earth as well. So, I think there are a lot of things that have been on earth now that can, you know, even without, you know without, without a project, you know government now has, you know, pieces that we can start working on and building on as well and if they do decide to go holistically, they have a starting point to build from.


Question 13.
Interviewer: How supportive, the existing policy, legal and regulatory framework for PPPs? How much resistance among policymakers will just be, we need to overcome to garner the necessary support, or how flexible is the PPP to changes in the government-to-government priorities.


Respondent:  Okay I think the environment in Rwanda is very positive. It's because of RDB and I think RDB is very open, they have very high caliber stuff that understand, you know, public private partnerships. I think the challenge would be that we don't have many examples in the health sector and the health sector can be quite is different because you're delivering healthcare. But every conversation that we had with RDB they were very open. They asked the questions that mattered, that as a health, you know, someone working in health.
We would not know would not think about, and they are very cooperative to build something as long as at the end of the day, it takes Rwanda to the next level. So, I think RDB is set up a really good system they have all these regulations processes tools systems when you submit to RDB a PPP proposal, there's a process that goes through as well before it's approved. And that process is very stringent, but you have an opportunity to work with them before submitting to make sure that you address some of the questions they will think of, or you can start thinking about it as well, or if you don't have an answer, you can say it and they can also now start looking for within their resources for solutions. So, I think, I think the framework for PPP is in Rwanda, I think there's no challenge there I think where the challenge comes in, is because it's a small market. And I think that that's an honest point, because it's a small market to kind of private sector that's attracted into the country may be expensive.  But then Rwanda and RDB is able to negotiate, as long as they have full information. So, I think that's why the involvement of RDB is very important and I believe it is under Ministry of Finance right.  Bit autonomous, but you know I think they work well with finance so they also have a finance lens. At the end of the day, which I think is very important. But I think and they've also had a lot of not just people from the UK, they have a very diverse team as well. People who have seen private sector and been engaged in private sector from different countries across the world. So, in terms of the legal, regulatory framework for PPP, the processes. I think there's no question that it's very positive. 
And I think it's very serious. I think that's the main point you don't just present any PPP I think it's going to be accepted know this very stringent process to understand what the benefits are going to be to the country, what is it going to cost the country. And what does it leave the country with at the end of the day, so it's you don't just submit any PPP and I think that's why government was also very hesitant to submit, because you have to be very strong. I think it's presented in cabinet as well, and cabinets approved or disapproved then there's the PPP working group within RDB, that includes other people as well. So, it's real they're looking at it from a business class country perspective so I, for me, the PPP process is great. It's just that there are very few examples in the health sector to build up one. Yeah.


Question 14.
Interviewer: What other recent early experiences of project have been there in country that can provide lessons for AHDP? Like Abbott or Roche So, how do you see this you know from the early experience that you have?

Respondent:  So, I didn't work with Abbott and Roche I don't know, I really don't know what happened there. And I can't, I can't speak to that. But I think the fact that they are those three, you know, it's good. I think it's I think you only fail forward. I think that's something Rwanda does a lot of learns and fields for it, it tends not to repeat past mistakes so, but I think it'd be good to speak to them, or people who are aware of the issues and opportunities. But personally, I'm not, I'm not fully informed yeah.


Question 15.
Interviewer: What has been a historic investment in interest from the government in laboratory diagnostics?


Respondent: I can say that. I think it's been a journey. I want. If I give an answer to be very. What's the word statistic cross section of people? I think my answer would be very biased but if you look at the investments that the government has made. One thing that I will say is that lab diagnostics is really questioned whether it's worth investing in or not. That's one. And whenever there's a new opportunity to improve the diagnostics to, you know, do better test the better to, you know, something that can deliver more value for money. You know, it's really considered seriously so for me that's a big eye opener. I think it shows that it's a priority, and the fact that even RSSB that you know the lab tariffs is very low.  The fact that they say that for me shows that they really realized that without proper diagnostics, you can't treat people well you can't give people good quality of care, or you end up wasting money in the long run because then they'll come around again and again until the diagnostics is cut right.I don't understand the why the profiling lab. The lab cadres were changed. And I think that's a question that I didn't get answers to I realized that the lab team though particular people who kept raising that question and planning didn't want to answer it. So, I think there's a reason, and it sounds like a complex one of those where, you know, it's, you have to wait. Which side to build on. So, I'm not sure why the cadre was changed, but I think that's an area that needs to be looked into because by the time it was brought up in a policy meeting, that means they had grievances below, and then then those are dealt with, you know, it may have repercussions in the future. But it's difficult for me to answer that


Question 16.
Interviewer:  Who are the key stakeholders in the PPP and why are they involved? Do you think there is partners and stakeholders we can go on and interview?

Respondent: I think if you, if you talk to someone. I think what I think you should break down the multilateral that Institute institutions like, USAID and CDC to look at the projects, the actual projects that are working in this space. And I think there are also other donors. You know that are involved that don't necessarily sit in Rwanda I know FIND this one example, FIND Yeah. Is it five years, and then there's another one called? So, there are a couple of instances, there a couple of private entities of donor company so they probably like, I know these because they were funding, some of CHAI work, CEPHID, I think is also another one stuff in the field also is an interesting.  But they are those smaller organizations, they're not based in a country they do a lot of marketing, and they also shape. A lot of this as well so they may be helpful to get the private, you know, what's the private sector, for example, that we're referring to in this case and I think that's maybe, maybe the only got that, that I saw.We have private labs we have private document, but who would have ultimately done this work. And I think that's the gap that I think I don't know the answer, sorry but just some thinking aloud.


Question 17.
Interviewer:  And I'll just go quickly whose interests are helped or hurts, by laboratory diagnostics happening in the public versus the private sector?


Respondent: One thing I know about private sector is again for Rwanda, the biggest market is the public sector. So, I think for me it feels like a win-win. I think the private sector, entry may be narrowed a little bit. If this works, so you won't just have anyone coming in anyhow. The US, the country will be forced to develop a process to show you know how entry for different diagnostics done. So, I think, I think it could benefit both, I think it's a win win. If unless you because Rwanda is not the country that has that benefits from chaos. If you have a country like I won't mention that benefits from chaos, by streamlining it you're, you know, reducing the opportunities for corruption. So that's not the case here. So here in this case because you're streamlining things better, and also improving the diagnostic capabilities, it's a win for public sector, it's a win for private sector because then you know the know where the money's coming from how much is going to be invested and so on what equipment needs to happen. At what point new equipment will be sold who's trying to have the information as well, to, to support. And then, ultimately, I think the biggest benefactors’ patients. In this case, yeah. Ultimately, they're the biggest manufacturers.


Question 18.
Interviewer:  How would the structure of the AHDP project itself affect the dynamics at the country level? For example, how you know how BMG or European banks, CHAI influence country level PPP dynamics in Rwanda?


Respondent: The tough one. I think I'll give you the politically correct answer. I think the question of how do incentives align is a big one. And understanding what each groups incentive is important. I think in the case of Rwanda. I think the countries selected were clearly countries where the government ownership. So, I think in parts, there was very little influence that any external player could have. Because if you look at if you're here for example, very strong in country ownership, you know, deciding on how things will go whether it makes sense. And so it was difficult to influence.
You know, I think I cannot answer for gates, but I know gates funds a lot of different, you know, companies, you know, so I think, in part, you know, there's a there was a benefit to be able to have more different so many different entities I think having a holistic plan, you know, to understand, for them, you know, where do all these pieces fit to actually make a difference in our country. I think that was important for CHAI diagnostics is a big part of, you know, the four components of health system strengthening, you know this the equipment diagnostics human resources and medicines. And I think this was an area that very few people think about in terms of helping government figure out holistically. So, if I look at the positive incentives, you know, you can see how the different incentives can align and why each of these institutions would want to see come through.
I think Chai was a buffer between gates, and the government, to make sure that it's very neutral. And there's no, like, you know, there's no, there's no one side, influencing the other. And I found that to be a very good function and role of CHAI to just provide the information and I remember we kept I kept telling them it's our job is to provide the information, the country decides it's not our job to make a decision for the country, provide all the options, and then let them decide what's best and that's all CHAI does, it's a TA provide information, put it on the table, the pros and cons. And I think that makes part of the conversation difficult for this one because it was not straightforward, that just because you know the pros and cons, you can design the solution. And so yeah, that's a tough question though.


Interviewer: And you said something that I was not able to capture. 
When you started comparing Rwanda and Ethiopia to say Rwanda that has little low influence on the private sector what exactly you want it to align on this? 

Respondent: I said they're similar because they both have strong government ownership. Yeah, and I think that that's a very positive thing. You can't just influence both governments they are in control of, you know the direction in which the country moves and I think that's also why AHDP in these two countries was important to start in these two countries, because these needs clear, you know, a government that can lead the process because it's so complex, and I think that that's what I was trying to bring out.  They're not governments that can easily be swayed or influence.


Question 19.
Interviewer: I think we're going toward our last question, thank you for bearing with us. I'm sorry.
How interested are private partners in participating in the PPP, and you know have a couple of questions that just throw them, tell me how you respond because they're all links are related.
a. What is the private partner’s main question around participating in the PPP?
b.What is the biggest incentive for private partners to participate in the PPP in this country?
c.What are the biggest drawbacks? For a private Partners not to participate in the PPP.
d. Do you think that private partners working in laboratory diagnostic in country have the capacity to participate and deliver the PPP? 
e.Are you aware of the financial instruments that AHDP is offering, if so, why what are they, and also private partners interested in taking up?


Respondent: so again, I don't know all the private entities. But the bottom line for private sector is, you know, what do I gain? What's my ultimately, they're not public sector that we know. So, in terms of their bank balance what will it look like at the end of this so, I think one thing that I was, you know, nervous about, and I mentioned briefly is what it depends on how much money private sector is going to make over what period of time compared to what they're what they're benefiting now. So, for example if it's just transportation and, you know, improving the transportation, a private player who's already doing logistics in Rwanda, taking on a contract like that it's really big win for them and being able to compete for it, and all logistic companies being able to compete for that is a big win. Rwanda may not attract a huge, you know, private logistics player. You know, that's not in country already for something like that because the profit margin may not be may not may not make sense for them to invest in at that point. So that's from the side of the, the logistics. However, if you move to equipment, you know, if it meant that there was going to be a particular change in. In, you know the equipment investment and the amount of money that's required to invest. You know that could be a whole different ballgame and depending on how the PPP terms of reference or fulfil RFP, is drawn out. You know, that's in itself could attract a different kind of caliber but different types of private entities, depending on because remember it has to be attractive for private sector as well. And I think that's the tricky balance between PPP for oxygen, it was very clear because, you know, you have an entity coming putting in a plant, managing it. So, it's aware of how much is going on how much is coming in, and it has the market because RSSB already pays for oxygen. So, 80% of the oxygen forget so forth for oxygen It was so clear.
And so, I think the same thing would have to happen in this case, you have to show why should they invest in it as well, because it's a mutually beneficial partnership. So, I'm not, I think maybe Sam and Namita could speak more to that, I think especially Sam who understands you know CEPHIED and all those private entities a bit more. I think the other piece that would help would be the way in which reagents are also procured.  You know, and the timeliness of payments and so on. So, I think that also would be one angle that would be very positive. And then, again, this was a reform planet scale. So, by planning or performance scale. The figures are very clear. And so, I think the many wins that the private sectors would have private partners would have, but depending on the level, it would attract even local private players, it would attract a mix of local private players and international private players
In terms of the financial instruments. I from the site, I'm not sure I'm not sure how big the initial investment that was required was for each of those but I think If it was not very big then probably you know it would not be very interesting for private players to apply for those loans. And depending on the size of the institution as well so if it's a local, local player, applying for that grant, probably to be attractive whereas an international and may already have money, and they don't need a loan to invest in such a project. So, I think it also depends on the, you know, the due diligence has done on each of the different private entities that are apply for the different components, and then also I don't know if it was going to be a ton of reference for the full piece was just four components. So, in designing the PPP which was a stage that I wasn't there so I'm not sure if that stage is gone.
But the design of a PPP is also very important, because what kind of players you attract into the market. And by, you may have players that are already there, will they improve the quality, or do you want to have players that are in Europe, where you know they'll definitely improve the quality but at a cost so the design element of the RFP for the PPP and how the PPP is rolled out is also very important.


Question 20.
Interviewer: What are or could be the plans to support public sector financing in the future? which different source of funding that are expected, are they financing support sustainable?


Respondent: I think, the current it's mainly health insurance that's paying for diagnostics. And I think, like I mentioned before, whether we're whether the tariff is accurate or not is something that needs to be needs to be investigated further.  I think the system also one of the advantages that this PPP was going to do was to help RSSB improved on how it determines tariffs.
Because right now, you may have a tariff of 3000 for let's say HPV test, but there are two types of HPV test one plus 501 plus 3000. But the facility is always going to charge 3000, because that's the tax that's in the system.  And so, this PPP, this is a small example but the PPP by being able to provide very accurate data would help RSSB now streamline its tariffs, each of the different kinds of tests because they have very many tests and I think that question kept coming kept coming up but it's very difficult to summarize the tests that are available. And so, while CVH I would still finance most of the diagnostics. It would help find efficiencies for CBHI
And I think that's an opportunity which I hope will be missed because there are very few other, you know, I don't think even anyone working in financing is interested in going to that level of detail for lab diagnostic testing tariffs, because it's a lot of work, and it's very complicated I trained, but you have to find which test is which testifies which instrument and what are the different regions, and this is for one equipment that does five test, then this other equipment does two test, then this one does one test. It's just too much if there were two tests fine, but there are thousands of tests. So, this is one program that could potentially improve that it's, it's very.  Someone has to be very forward looking to see disadvantage. But people forget that diagnostics play a huge part in how much the HIV is and if he moves down the route of moving away from fee for service to more competition, and eventually bundling which I think it will do. This helps prepare that because by the time they go to bundling they know what tests are done for what and how much they cost, it will be much easier to do that costing but imagine having to get to the point where being bundling, and then you have to start thinking about okay what the diagnostic costs are. That's going to be a nightmare. If you get one consultant to do that. They won't do it right. Whereas if you break it down and first fix this now. And then combine it later with that you know it's you're saving a lot of time, because it's something that's coming. So, it has to be done. Yeah.


Interviewer: Thank you so much really, I like to ask if you have any question or anything else to add.

Respondent: I think for me the thing that I hope they don't stop is the financing piece, figuring out. You know the true cost of some of the diagnostic tests and you know if you find information that shows that they've already started working on that do share, because then that negates my point completely, because we could have started on it somewhere in tariffs revisions. Yeah.

Interviewer: Enjoy the rest of the day and really appreciate your time, your thoughts around how we can improve, thank you so much










