Question 1.
Interviewer: So please, can you describe your involvement in the PPP process and the African health diagnostic platform in Rwanda? 

Respondent:  Yeah, I think this is the first time to be involved in this research. But as I said before, In country, we have a public private partnership project that has been running for some years. I think it started if I remember, well, it is around 2017, but I was not much involved in the project. And the information I may provide is not the information, like someone who has been involved in the design and running of the project.  It is the information from someone who is in institution that has running the project.


Interviewer:  Thank you very much. Who is that person who has the information so we can target him/ her for this interview? 

Respondent: Yeah. The project was coordinated by the head of National Reference Laboratory. 

Question 2.
Interviewer: There is no problem. You can provide the information that you can have but you are familiar with this African health diagnostic platform, as it has been coordinated at national reference laboratory. At least you have some information on it?


Respondent:  Yes I have 

Question 3.
Interviewer:  So what was the process of negotiation of this PPP?


Respondent: According to what I know the private part is Abbott, Abbott who provided clinical chemistry, hematology, and molecular equipment. So Abbott provide three types of equipment the negotiation was coordinated by RDB, RDB business experts. And RBC was providing the technical point of view and information needed in collaboration with Abbot. RDB designed negotiation document 

Interviewer: How did this process vary by topic, for example, the facility selection, procurement model and the contract type, including referral network and other things? 


Respondent: I think we considered all the health facility levels at initial stage national reference lab had the three types of equipment. We took two teaching university hospitals, which is, CHUK, CHUB and recently appointed. We have recently appointed them as referral hospital. I think Ruhengeri and Kibungo then, well, we considered also some hospitals which are on the borders, Byumba, Gisenyi, Gihundwe and these are the satellite lab. Yeah because equipment needs some infrastructure to accommodate them so I think all the hospital, all the levels were placed at district hospital provincial and referral hospitals and the national reference lab. But an assessment was conducted to see the volume of samples tested on the selected hospitals as the basis of negotiation.


Question 4. 
Interviewer: So what were the sticking point around the PPP design and how will they resolved? 


Respondent:  I think  the starting point was to compare the  price  of  reagents and consumables  but  This was the initial stage  where especially the partner, the Abbott was sticking on  it requested  the cost involved  at least one test. Actually Abbott wanted, we provided the cost it took us to run lab tests. Yes. 
And this was all the biomarkers we went on equipment. each equipment to, to see what can be currently, what is the cost to run each, every test, the majority of the test that can be performed on each analyzer so from the side of the government but for us as it was a  new project for us, we didn't  have much  issues. Cause we were expecting to get the answers on many issues. We used it to face, two of them one was the availability of commodities in due time to avoid stock out. I think this was the main, because the maintenance issue was fixed after availing maintenance contract Abbott came once we had maintenance contract of most of the equipment. We wanted to have commodities in short term around time. For the side of Abbott I can't say it is a problem. It was maybe the information needed to initiate the business Abbott was looking for cost information to run different lab tests.


Question 5.  
Interviewer: Who has been involved in the initial design of the PPP on the side of the government, on the side of the, the partners, 

Respondent:  I said it is RBC and RDB teams and if I remember well the design was coordinated by RBC by the business unit and BIOS department was providing the technical information needed but the former director of business unit was the one who coordinated the design. CHAI came in later in the evaluation of the project. Well, I don't have much information but I think RDB was involved and MOF was involved come in to validate the process
Yes. The health facilities was also involved because RBC and RDB made a draft of the process. And I think there were many changes which were made because at initial stage, the hospitals claimed that the cost may be high compared to the existing, to the existing running cost of the sample transportation, there were many meetings where the hospitals were involved.  



Interviewer: How did the initial design change and during the deliberations,
 
Respondent: it was based on the cost.

Interviewer:  Yes. So they did they, did they change the cost? 

Respondent: Yes. About reduced the cost. We were comparing to the existing running costs of different laboratory tests.  Abbott reduces the cost not to go beyond to what we use to today.


Interviewer:  How did this change affect the process, would affect the process of the design and the negotiation?


Respondent: I don't have much detail of the negotiation, but what I think is we were trying because we were trying to have the cost, which is not expensive. 


Question 6.
Interviewer:  So who or which institution would have been ultimately responsible for approving the PPP design? 

Respondent:  I think it is between RDB and MOF I'm not sure which among them. 


Question 7. 
Interviewer:  What option were all are still being consider when designing the model. So the different contracting options, for example, the consideration geographical spread. So refer network like that

Respondent: I think there is three options for us is to have equipment free of charge yes, because it is a placement model.  Having equipment, availing maintenance services and capacity building, this is a three services, which has to be offered at free of charge , but of course Abbott as a business institution has to recover all those costs  through  the reagent over time. 


Question 8.
Interviewer: How appropriate is the design of African health diagnostic platform public private partnership to the local context? For example political, social, economic and technological environmental housing, the agnostic market.


Respondent: I do not have much information about this.


Question 9.
Interviewer:  How would an ideal public private partnership design accommodate the need of apriority population, for example, the poor household, the complicated patients? 


Respondent:  I didn't yet know once we implemented the PPP, if it'll be easy, why? Cause if you can see, we have social cases, in most of our hospitals, we have social cases like people from, I think, with the one and with the too, which don't pay which the government to pay for we have many social cases in the hospitals for me, I didn't yet, currently I take Abbott the PPP of Abbott Currently it is running, it is running like any other placement, because even for Roche, we have placement equipment they keep received through leasing system which the equipment is placed. Then we only buy reagent with extra cost we have some few equipment for Roche in this framework but   if we can take the lab management we offer it to a private company.  I think there will be two challenges. One as once for the, the lab, the lab generated incomes to be managed by a private company. Every client has to pay. And I'm not sure if you will manage to pay for all the social cases because was we buy reagents, we offer service Business oriented. So ours is to serve and we don't focus on the vestment and benefits, but once the business company comes in, I think they have to work for benefits. This is number one, number two, who also most of the labs are most of the hospital  survive from the incomes generated from the lab. So I think those two things, I think, need to be a challenge be the challenge. 


Question 10.
Interviewer: So how would the PPP design address key considerations to improve access of laboratory diagnostics in PPP is proposed?


Respondent: Okay. Accessibility. I think access, the package may be increased because there is the hospitals do not offer to the do not the clients yet the equipment itself can, can offer the service. But the problem is not the, the reagents, which is not purchased accessibility, I think. But affordability, I think it is a challenge. 


Question 11.
Interviewer: So what factors do you think changed the discussion around the PPP? 


Respondent:  I think I mentioned before. So I think we talked about the Cost and turnaround time and I think it can be reduced.  But as the cost, I don't think it can change because all of them are in business. Yes. The business way it is designed to, to invest in the recovery, which you invest okay.


Interviewer:  So how has COVID-19 affected the PPP design? 

Respondent: COVID-19 affected the PPP design because Abbott platforms they did not meet the volume sample needed to be tested.  The volume of samples was huge while the machine could run few compared to the volume. 


Question 12. 
Interviewer: So if AHDP is providing a technical support and the facilitating financing for these PPP, how will the availability of this support affect the PPP design? 


Respondent: I think there is a burden of finance, which will be reduced so burden will be reduced. Finance is always a challenge in any business.


Interviewer: So what are the features of PPP design that would not be possible without AHDP technical support?

Respondent: Not be possible. So I'm not yet. Sure.

Question 13.
Interviewer: So the how supportive is the existing policy legal and the regulatory framework for the PPPs? 

Respondent: the existing policy. Yeah, the regulatory, I think the RPPA framework, don't support to offer the tender to one person the procurement policy and framework is open while the PPP is closed the tender.

Interviewer: How much resistance among policymakers will this people need to overcome to garner the necessary support?

Respondent:  I do not have much information about this. I'm not sure. 


Question 14. 
Interviewer:  What other recent or area experiences or project have there been in a country that can provide lessons for AHDP? I think this is, what you have been discussing. And you were involved in the Abbott.

Respondent: Not really much. I can view the people who were involved, 


Interviewer: How the experience of Abbott was similar or different from African health diagnostic platform?

Respondent: But I think they are different because Abbott is the business company, I think AHDP manage a private company to facilitate the mediation between the government and the business companies. I think they're quite different.

Question 16.
Interviewer: So who are the key stakeholders in the PPP? And why are they involved? 

Respondent: I don’t have much information on this as I was not involved currently we have many partners in the lab, CHAI is in charge of the monitoring of this PPP and providing technical support and facilitating in issue of finance.


Question 20.
Interviewer: What are, or could be the plans in a place to support the public sector financing of diagnostic in the future? So which different source of funding are expected to be used for financing diagnostic? 

Respondent: The first one is the incomes generated from the lab. The second one. As I said, there is always social cases, which don't pay services. Is the support of the government, the third one and it's the partner different partners have in country. 


Interviewer: Do you have information about how government increased financing support to diagnostic during the PPP period of for example the

Respondent:  we may say no, because sometimes the, the support keeps decreasing. 


Question 21. 
So the last question is, is to ask you, if you have anything else that you would like to discuss about the PPP that we have not talked about?

Respondent: But for me, I think  well, I think even if what maybe we didn't discuss is that if you can see how Abbott was designed at initial stage  and how it was implemented  I think  it didn't reach its objectives. The initial plan was to take the management of public laboratories but currently have the project being run it is the, it is like a placement system, like other partners. They wanted to run labs. Manage the incomes generated then shares the incomes generated between the government and themselves. But if you can sell the project is being run. It is like any other you system so I may not say PPP project, as it was designed, it didn't reach its objectives. 


Interviewer: So what is the consequence of not reaching this initial plan for the system?

Respondent: I was not involved in the implementation much involved with the implementation, but what I think was the challenge to not reach this objectives. I first one is the social cases which don't pay medical or laboratory services. Two. It is the incomes which support most the hospitals which support most the hospitals the funds generated which helps functionality of hospitals.
I would recommend that you first have to define the PPP and know what would be the Framework of the PPP. 














